# 2007.04074.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: /home/admin88/arxiv-downloader/automl-nas/2007.04074.pdf
# File size: 1241518 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Journal of Machine Learning Research 23 (2022) 1-61 Submitted 8/21; Revised 3/22; Published 8/22
Auto-Sklearn 2.0: Hands-free AutoML via Meta-Learning
Matthias Feurer1feurerm@cs.uni-freiburg.de
Katharina Eggensperger1eggenspk@cs.uni-freiburg.de
Stefan Falkner2Stefan.Falkner@de.bosch.com
Marius Lindauer3lindauer@tnt.uni-hannover.de
Frank Hutter1;2fh@cs.uni-freiburg.de
1Department of Computer Science, Albert-Ludwigs-Universit at Freiburg
2Bosch Center for Articial Intelligence, Renningen, Germany
3Institute of Information Processing, Leibniz University Hannover
Editor: Marc Schoenauer
Abstract
Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) supports practitioners and researchers with the
tedious task of designing machine learning pipelines and has recently achieved substantial
success. In this paper, we introduce new AutoML approaches motivated by our winning
submission to the second ChaLearn AutoML challenge. We develop PoSH Auto-sklearn ,
which enables AutoML systems to work well on large datasets under rigid time limits by
using a new, simple and meta-feature-free meta-learning technique and by employing a suc-
cessful bandit strategy for budget allocation. However, PoSH Auto-sklearn introduces even
more ways of running AutoML and might make it harder for users to set it up correctly.
Therefore, we also go one step further and study the design space of AutoML itself, propos-
ing a solution towards truly hands-free AutoML. Together, these changes give rise to the
next generation of our AutoML system, Auto-sklearn 2.0 . We verify the improvements by
these additions in an extensive experimental study on 39 AutoML benchmark datasets. We
conclude the paper by comparing to other popular AutoML frameworks and Auto-sklearn
1.0, reducing the relative error by up to a factor of 4 :5, and yielding a performance in 10
minutes that is substantially better than what Auto-sklearn 1.0 achieves within an hour.
Keywords: Automated machine learning, hyperparameter optimization, meta-learning,
automated AutoML, benchmark
1. Introduction
The recent substantial progress in machine learning (ML) has led to a growing demand
for hands-free ML systems that can support developers and ML novices in eciently cre-
ating new ML applications. Since dierent datasets require dierent ML pipelines, this
demand has given rise to the area of automated machine learning (AutoML; Hutter et al.,
2019). Popular AutoML systems, such as Auto-WEKA (Thornton et al., 2013), hyperopt-
sklearn (Komer et al., 2014), Auto-sklearn (Feurer et al., 2015a), TPOT (Olson et al.,
2016a) and Auto-Keras (Jin et al., 2019) perform a combined optimization across dierent
preprocessors, classiers or regressors and their hyperparameter settings, thereby reducing
the eort for users substantially.
©2022 Matthias Feurer and Katharina Eggensperger and Stefan Falkner and Marius Lindauer and Frank Hutter.
License: CC-BY 4.0, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ . Attribution requirements are provided
athttp://jmlr.org/papers/v23/21-0992.html .arXiv:2007.04074v3  [cs.LG]  4 Oct 2022

--- PAGE 2 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
To assess the current state of AutoML and, more importantly, to foster progress in
AutoML, ChaLearn conducted a series of AutoML challenges (Guyon et al., 2019), which
evaluated AutoML systems in a systematic way under rigid time and memory constraints.
Concretely, in these challenges, the AutoML systems were required to deliver predictions
in less than 20 minutes. On the one hand, this would allow to eciently integrate AutoML
into the rapid prototype-driven workow of many data scientists and, on the other hand,
help to democratize ML by requiring less compute resources.
We won both the rst and second AutoML challenge with modied versions of Auto-
sklearn . In this work, we describe in detail how we improved Auto-sklearn from the rst
version (Feurer et al., 2015a) to construct PoSH Auto-sklearn , which won the second com-
petition and then describe how we improved PoSH Auto-sklearn further to yield our current
approach for Auto-sklearn 2.0 .
Particularly, while AutoML relieves the user from making low-level design decisions
(e.g. which model to use), AutoML itself opens a myriad of high-level design decisions, e.g.
which model selection strategy to use (Guyon et al., 2010, 2015; Raschka, 2018) or how to
allocate the given time budget (Jamieson and Talwalkar, 2016). Whereas our submissions
to the AutoML challenges were mostly hand-designed, in this work, we go one step further
by automating AutoML itself to fully unfold the potential of AutoML in practice.1
After detailing the AutoML problem we consider in Section 2, we present two main
parts making the following contributions:
Part I: Portfolio Successive Halving in PoSH Auto-sklearn .In this part (see Sec-
tion 3), we introduce budget allocation strategies as a complementary design choice
to model selection strategies (holdout (HO) and cross-validation (CV)) for AutoML
systems. We suggest using the budget allocation strategy successive halving (SH) as
an alternative to always using the full budget (FB) to evaluate a conguration to
allocate more resources to promising ML pipelines. Furthermore, we introduce both
the practical approach as well as the theory behind building better portfolios for the
meta-learning component of Auto-sklearn . We show that this combination substan-
tially improves performance, yielding stronger results in 10 minutes than Auto-sklearn
1.0achieved in 60 minutes.
Part II: Automating AutoML in Auto-sklearn 2.0 .In this part (see Section 4), we
propose a meta-learning technique based on algorithm selection to automatically select
the best setting of the AutoML system itself for a given dataset. We dub the resulting
system Auto-sklearn 2.0 and depict the evolution from Auto-sklearn 1.0 viaPoSH
Auto-sklearn toAuto-sklearn 2.0 in Figure 1.
In Section 5, we additionally use the AutoML benchmark (Gijsbers et al., 2019) to evaluate
Auto-sklearn 2.0 against other popular AutoML systems and show improved performance
under rigid time constraints. Section 6 then puts our work into the context of related works,
and Section 7 concludes the paper with open questions, limitations and future work.
1. The work presented in this paper is in part based on two earlier workshop papers introducing some of
the presented ideas in preliminary form (Feurer et al., 2018; Feurer and Hutter, 2018).
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
Auto-sklearn 2.0{Xtrain,Ytrain,
Xtest,b,L}Selector selects
π∈{HO,CV}×
{SH,FB}Portfolio for πAutoML system using π
initial
designrun
BOˆYtestPoSH Auto-sklearn{Xtrain,Ytrain,
Xtest,b,L}π= (HO,SH ) Portfolio for πAutoML system using π
initial
designrun
BOˆYtestAuto-sklearn 1.0{Xtrain,Ytrain,
Xtest,b,L}User selects∗
π∈{HO,CV}KNDAutoML system using π
initial
designrun
BOˆYtest
∗by default select HO
Figure 1: Schematic overview of Auto-sklearn 1.0 ,PoSH Auto-sklearn , and Auto-sklearn
2.0. Orange rectangular boxes refer to input and output data, while rounded
purple boxes denote parts of the AutoML system (surrounded by a green dashed
line). The pink, rounded box refers to a human in the loop required for manual
design decisions. The newer AutoML systems simplify the usage of Auto-sklearn
and reduce the required user input. We describe PoSH Auto-sklearn in Section 3
and give a schematic overview in Figure 2. Similarly, we describe Auto-sklearn
2.0in Section 4 and provide a schematic overview in Figure 5.
2. Problem Statement
AutoML is a widely used term, so, here we rst dene the problem we consider in this
work. Let P(D) be a distribution of datasets from which we can sample an individual
dataset's distribution Pd=Pd(x;y). The AutoML problem we consider is to generate a
trained pipelineM:x7!y, hyperparameterized by 2that automatically produces
predictions for samples from the distribution Pdminimizing the expected generalization
error:2
GE(M) =E(x;y)Pd[L(M(x);y)]: (1)
Since a dataset can only be observed through a set of nindependent observations Dd=
f(x1;y1);:::; (xn;yn)gPd, we can only empirically approximate the generalization error
on sample data:
GEV
(M;Dd) =1
nnX
i=1L(M(xi);yi): (2)
In practice we have access to two disjoint, nite samples which we from now on denote Dtrain
andDtest(Dd;trainandDd;testin case we reference a specic dataset Pd). For searching the
best ML pipeline, we only have access to Dtrain, however, in the end performance is estimated
once onDtest. AutoML systems use this to automatically search for the best M:
M2argmin
2GEV
(M;Dtrain); (3)
2. Our notation follows Vapnik (1991).
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
and estimate GE, e.g., by a K-fold cross-validation:
GEV
CV(M;Dtrain) =1
KKX
k=1GEV
(MD(train ;k)
train
;D(val;k)
train); (4)
whereMD(train ;k)
train
denotes thatMwas trained on the training split of k-th foldD(train;k)
train
Dtrain, and it is then evaluated on the validation split of the k-th foldD(val;k)
train=Dtrainn
D(train;k)
train.3Assuming that, via , an AutoML system can select both, an algorithm and
its hyperparameter settings, this denition using GEV
CVis equivalent to the denition
of the CASH ( Combined Algorithm Selection and Hyperparameter optimization) prob-
lem (Thornton et al., 2013; Feurer et al., 2015a). However, it is unlikely that, whatever
optimization algorithm we use, the AutoML system nds the exact optimum location .
Instead, the AutoML system will return the best ML pipeline it has trained during the
search process, which we denote by M^, and the hyperparameter settings it was trained
with by ^.
2.1 Time-bounded AutoML
In practice, users are not only interested in obtaining an optimal pipeline Meventually,
but have constraints on how much time and compute resources they are willing to invest.
We denote the time it takes to evaluate GEV
(M;Dtrain) astand the overall optimization
budget byT. Our goal is to nd
M2argmin
2GEV
(M;Dtrain) s.t.X
ti
<T (5)
where the sum is over all evaluated pipelines i, explicitly honouring the optimization
budgetT. As before, the AutoML system will return the best model it has found within
the optimization budget, M^.
2.2 Generalization of AutoML
Ultimately, an AutoML system A:D7!MD
^should not only perform well on a single
dataset but on the entire distribution over datasets P(D). Therefore, the meta-problem of
AutoML can be formalized as minimizing the generalization error over this distribution of
datasets:
GE(A) =EDdP(D)h
GEV
(A(Dd);Dd)i
; (6)
which in turn can again only be approximated by a nite set of meta-train datasets Dmeta
(each with a nite set of observations):
GEV
(A;Dmeta) =1
jDmetajjDmetajX
d=1GEV
(A(Dd);Dd): (7)
3. Alternatively, one could use holdout to estimate GEwithGEV
HO(M;Dtrain) =GEV
(MDtrain
train
;Dval
train).
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
Having set up the problem statement, we can use this to further formalize our goals.
Instead of using a single, xed AutoML system A, we will introduce optimization policies ,
a combination of hyperparameters of the AutoML system and specic components to be
used in a run, which can be used to congure an AutoML system for specic use cases. We
then denote such a congured AutoML system as A.
We will rst construct manually in Section 3, introduce a novel system for designing
from data in Section 4 and then extend this to a (learned) mapping  : D!which
automatically suggests an optimization policy for a new dataset using algorithm selection.
This problem setup can also be used to introduce generalizations of the algorithm selection
problem such as algorithm conguration (Birattari et al., 2002; Hutter et al., 2009; Kleinberg
et al., 2017), per-instance algorithm conguration (Xu et al., 2010; Malitsky et al., 2012)
and dynamic algorithm conguration (Biedenkapp et al., 2020) on a meta-level; but we
leave these for future work. In addition, instead of selecting between multiple policies of a
single AutoML system, the presented method can be applied to choose between dierent
AutoML systems without adjustments. However, instead of maximizing performance by
invoking many AutoML systems, thereby increasing the complexity, our goal is to improve
single AutoML systems to make them easier to use by decreasing complexity for the user.
3. Part I: Portfolio Successive Halving in PoSH Auto-sklearn
In this section we introduce our winning solution for the second AutoML competition (Guyon
et al., 2019), PoSH Auto-sklearn , short for Portfolio Successive Halving. We rst describe
our use of portfolios to warmstart an AutoML system and then motivate using the successive
halving bandit strategy. Next, we describe practical considerations for building PoSH Auto-
sklearn , give a schematic overview and recap additional handcrafted techniques we used in
the competition. We end this rst part of our main contributions with an experimental
evaluation demonstrating the performance of PoSH Auto-sklearn .
3.1 Portfolio Building
Finding the optimal solution to the time-bounded optimization problem from Equation (5)
requires searching a large space of possible ML pipelines as eciently as possible. BO is a
strong approach for this, but its vanilla version starts from scratch for every new problem.
A better solution is to warmstart BO with ML pipelines that are expected to work well, as
done in the k-nearest dataset (KND) approach of Auto-sklearn 1.0 (Reif et al., 2012; Feurer
et al., 2015b,a; see also the related work in Section 6.4.1). However, we found this solution
to introduce new problems:
1. It is time-consuming since it requires to compute meta-features describing the char-
acteristics of datasets.
2. It adds complexity to the system as the computation of the meta-features must also
be done with a time and memory limit.
3. Many meta-features are not dened with respect to categorical features and missing
values, making them hard to apply for most datasets.
4. It is not immediately clear which meta-features work best for which problem.
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
5. In the KND approach, there is no mechanism to guarantee that we do not execute
redundant ML pipelines.
We indeed suered from these issues in the rst AutoML challenge, failing on one track
due to running over time for the meta-feature generation, although we had already removed
landmarking meta-features due to their potentially high runtime. Therefore, here we pro-
pose a meta-feature-free approach that does not warmstart with a set of congurations
specic to a new dataset, but which uses a static portfolio { a set of complementary cong-
urations that covers as many diverse datasets as possible and minimizes the risk of failure
when facing a new task.
So, instead of evaluating congurations chosen online by the KND method, we construct
a portfolio, consisting of high-performing and complementary ML pipelines to perform well
on as many datasets as possible, oine . Then, for a dataset at hand, all pipelines in this
portfolio are simply evaluated one after the other. If time is left afterwards, we continue with
pipelines suggested by BO warmstarted with the evaluated portfolio pipelines. We introduce
portfolio-based warmstarting to avoid computing meta-features for a new dataset. However,
the portfolios also work inherently dierently. While the KND method is aimed at using
only well-performing congurations, a portfolio is built such that there is a diverse set of
congurations, starting with ones that perform well on average and then moving to more
specialized ones. Thus, it can be seen as an optimized initial design for the BO method.
In the following, we describe our oine procedure for constructing such a portfolio and
give theoretical underpinning by a performance bound.
3.1.1 Approach
We rst describe how we construct a portfolio given a nite set of candidate pipelines
C=f1;:::;lg. Additionally, we assume that there exists a set of datasets Dmeta =
fD1;:::;DjDmetajgand we wish to build a portfolio Pconsisting of a subset of the pipelines
inCthat performs well on Dmeta.
We outline the process to build such a portfolio in Algorithm 1. First, we initialize
our portfolioPto the empty set (Line 2). Then, we repeat the following procedure until
jPjreaches a pre-dened limit: From a set of candidate ML pipelines C, we greedily add a
candidate +2CtoPthat reduces the estimated generalization error over all meta-datasets
most (Line 4), and then remove +fromC(Line 5).
The estimated generalization error of a portfolio Pon a single dataset Dis the per-
formance of the best pipeline 2P onDaccording to the model selection and budget
allocation strategy. This can be described via a function S(;;), which takes as input a
function to compute the estimated generalization error (e.g., as dened in Equation 4), a
set of machine learning pipelines to train, and a dataset. It then returns the pipeline with
the lowest estimated generalization error as
MD
=S(GEV
;P;D)2argmin
MD
2PGEV
(MD
;D): (8)
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
Algorithm 1: Greedy Portfolio Building
1:Input: Set of candidate ML pipelines C,Dmeta=fD1;:::;DjDmetajg, maximal portfolio
sizep, model selection strategy S
2:P=;
3:whilejPj<pdo
4:+= argmin2CGEV
S(P[fg;Dmeta)
// Ties are broken favoring the model trained first.
5:P=P[+;C=Cnf+g
6:end while
7:return PortfolioP
In case the result of argmin is not unique, we return the model that was evaluated rst. The
estimated generalization error of Pacross all meta-datasets Dmeta=fD1;:::;DjDmetajgis
then
GEV
S(P;Dmeta) =jDmetajX
d=1GEV
S
GEV
;P;Dd
;Dval
d
; (9)
Here, we give the equation for using holdout, and in Appendix A we provide the exact
notation for cross-validation and successive halving.
We now detail how to construct the set of candidate pipelines Cand describe how nding
the candidate pipelines and constructing the portfolio t in the larger picture. We give a
schematic overview of this process in Figure 2. It consists of a training (TR1{TR3) and a
testing stage (TE1{TE2).
Having collected datasets Dmeta (we describe in Section 3.4.1 how we did this for our
experiments), we obtain the candidate ML pipelines (TR1) by running Auto-sklearn without
meta-learning and without ensembling on each dataset. We limit ourselves to a nite set of
portfolio candidates C, and pick one candidate per dataset. Then, we build a performance
matrix of sizejCjj Dmetajby evaluating each of these candidate pipelines on each dataset
(TR2, we refer to Section 3.4.2 for a detailed description of the meta-data generation).
Finally, we then use this matrix to build a portfolio using Algorithm 1 for the combination
of model selection strategy holdout and budget allocation strategy SH in training step TR3.
For a new dataset Dnew2Dtest, we apply the AutoML system using SH, holdout and the
portfolio toDnew(TE1). Finally, we return the best found pipeline M^, or an ensemble of
the evaluated pipelines, based on the training set of Dnew(TE2.1). Optionally, we can then
compute the loss of M^on the test set of Dnew(TE2.2); we emphasize that this would be
the only time we ever access the test set of Dnew.
To build a portfolio across datasets, we need to take into account that the generalization
errors for dierent datasets live on dierent scales (Bardenet et al., 2013). Thus, before
taking averages, for each dataset, we transform the generalization errors to the distance
to the best observed performance scaled between zero and one, a metric named distance
to minimum ; which when averaged across all datasets is known as average distance to the
minimum (ADTM) (Wistuba et al., 2015a, 2018). We compute the statistics for zero-one
scaling individually for each combination of model selection and budget allocation (i.e., we
use the lowest observed test loss and the largest observed test loss for each meta-dataset).
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
OptionalRepresentative
set of datasets
{D1, . . . ,D|Dmeta |}TR1: Obtain
set of candidate
ML pipelinesCTR2: Evaluate full
performance matrix
of shape|C|×|Dmeta|TR3: Construct
portfolioP
TE1: Run
AutoML system
eval
Prun
BOTE2.1: Return best
found pipelineMˆλ∗or
ensemble of pipelinesTE2.2: Report
loss onDnew,testDnew,trainDnewDnew,testTRain (oﬄine)
TEst (online)
Figure 2: Schematic Overview of PoSH Auto-sklearn with the oine portfolio building
phase (TR1-TR3) above and the test phase (TE1-TE2) below the dashed line.
Rounded, purple boxes refer to computational steps while rectangular, orange
boxes depict the input data to the AutoML system.
For each meta-dataset Dd2Dmeta we have access to both Dd;trainandDd;test. In the
case of holdout, we split the training set Dd;traininto two smaller disjoint sets Dtrain
d;trainand
Dval
d;train. We usually train models using Dtrain
d;trainand useDval
d;trainto choose a ML pipeline
Mfrom the portfolio by means of the model selection strategy S(instead of holdout
we can of course also use cross-validation to compute the validation loss). However, if we
instead choose the ML pipeline on the test set Dd;test, Equation 9 becomes a monotone and
submodular set function, which results in favorable guarantees for the greedy algorithm
that we detail in Section 3.1.2. We follow this approach for the portfolio construction in
the oine phase; we emphasize that for a new dataset Dnew, we of course do not require
access to the test set Dnew;test.
3.1.2 Theoretical Properties of the Greedy Algorithm
Besides the already mentioned practical advantages of the proposed greedy algorithm, this
algorithm also enjoys a bounded worst-case error.
Proposition 1 Minimizing the test loss of a portfolio Pon a set of datasets D1;:::;DjDmetaj,
when choosing an ML pipeline from PforDdusing holdout or cross-validation based on
its performance on Dd;test, is equivalent to the sensor placement problem for minimizing
detection time (Krause et al., 2008).
We detail this equivalence in Appendix C.2. Thereby, we can apply existing results for the
sensor placement problem to our problem. Using the test set of the meta-datasets Dmetato
construct a portfolio is perfectly ne as long as we do not use new datasets Dnew2Dtest
which we use for testing the approach.
Corollary 1 The penalty function for all meta-datasets is submodular.
We can directly apply the proof from Krause et al. (2008) that the so-called penalty function
(i.e., maximum estimated generalization error minus the observed estimated generalization
error) is submodular and monotone to our problem setup. Since linear combinations of
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
submodular functions are also submodular (Krause and Golovin, 2014), the penalty function
is also submodular.
Corollary 2 The problem of nding an optimal portfolio Pis NP-hard (Nemhauser et al.,
1978; Krause et al., 2008).
Corollary 3 LetRdenote the expected penalty reduction of a portfolio across all datasets,
compared to the empty portfolio (which yields the worst possible score for each dataset). The
greedy algorithm returns a portfolio Psuch thatR(P)R(P)(1 1
e)R(P).
This means that the greedy algorithm closes at least 63% of the gap between the worst
ADTM score (1.0) and the score the best possible portfolio Pof sizejPjwould achieve
(Nemhauser et al., 1978; Krause and Golovin, 2014). A generalization of this result given by
Krause and Golovin (2014, Theorem 1.5) also tightens this bound to close 99% of the gap
between the worst ADTM score and the score the optimal portfolio Pof sizejPjwould
achieve, by extending the portfolio constructed by the greedy algorithm to size 5 jPj. Please
note that a portfolio of size 5 jPj could be better than the optimal portfolio of size jPj.
This means that we can nd a close-to-optimal portfolio on the meta-train datasets Dmeta
at the very least. Under the assumption that we apply the portfolio to datasets from the
same distribution of datasets, we have a strong set of default ML pipelines.
We could also apply other strategies for the sensor set placement in our setting, such as
mixed integer programming strategies, which can solve it optimally; however, these do not
scale to portfolio sizes of a dozen ML pipelines (Krause et al., 2008; Psterer et al., 2018).
The same proposition (with the same proof) and corollaries apply if we select an ML
pipeline based on an intermediate step in a learning curve or use cross-validation instead of
holdout. We discuss using the validation set and other model selection and budget allocation
strategies in Appendix C.3 and Appendix C.4.
3.2 Budget Allocation using Successive Halving
A key issue we identied during the last AutoML challenge was that training expensive
congurations on the complete training set, combined with a low time budget, does not
scale well to large datasets. At the same time, we noticed that our (then manual) strategy
to run predened pipelines on subsets of the data already yielded predictions good enough
for ensemble building. This questions the common choice of assigning the same amount of
resources to all pipeline evaluations, i.e. time, compute and data.
For this reason we introduce the principle of budget allocation strategies to AutoML, that
describe how the resources are allocated to the pipeline evaluations. This is an orthogonal
design decision to the model selection strategy , which approximates the generalization error
of a single ML pipeline, and which is typically tackled by holdout or K-fold cross-validation
(see Section 6.4.1).
As a principled alternative to always using the full budget, we used the successive halving
bandit strategy (SH; Karnin et al., 2013; Jamieson and Talwalkar, 2016), which assigns more
budget to promising machine learning pipelines and can easily be combined with iterative
algorithms.
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
3.2.1 Approach
AutoML systems evaluate each pipeline under the same resource limitations and on the
same budget (e.g., number of iterations using iterative algorithms). To increase eciency
for cases with tight resource limitations, we suggest allocating more resources to promising
pipelines by using SH (Karnin et al., 2013; Jamieson and Talwalkar, 2016) to prune poor-
performing pipelines aggressively.
Given a minimal and maximal budget per ML pipeline, SH starts by training a xed
number of ML pipelines for the smallest budget. Then, it iteratively selects1
of the pipelines
with the lowest generalization error, multiplies their budget by , and re-evaluates. This
process is continued until only a single ML pipeline is left or the maximal budget is spent,
and replaces the standard holdout procedure in which every ML pipeline is trained for the
full budget.
While SH itself chooses new pipelines Mto evaluate at random, we aim to extend on
our work on Auto-sklearn 1.0 and continue to use BO. To do so, we follow work combining
SH with BO (Falkner et al., 2018).4Specically, we use BO to iteratively suggest new ML
pipelinesM, which we evaluate on the lowest budget until a xed number of pipelines has
been evaluated. Then, we run SH as described above. We are using Auto-sklearn 's standard
random forest-based BO method SMAC and, according to the methodology of Falkner et al.
(2018) build the model for BO on the highest available budget for which we have sucient
datapoints. While the original model had a mathematical requirement for n+ 1 nished
pipelines, where nis the number of hyperparameters to be optimized, the random forest
model can guide the optimization with fewer datapoints, and we dene sucient asn
2. The
portfolios we have introduced in Section 3.1 integrate seamlessly into this scheme: as long
as not all members of the portfolio have been evaluated, we suggest them instead of asking
BO for a new suggestion.
SH potentially provides large speedups, but it could also too aggressively cut away good
congurations that need a higher budget to perform best. Thus, we expect SH to work best
for large datasets, for which there is not enough time to train many ML pipelines for the
full budget (FB), but for which training an ML pipeline on a small budget already yields a
good indication of the generalization error.
We note that SH can be used in combination with both, holdout or cross-validation, and
thus indeed adds another hyper-hyperparameter to the AutoML system, namely whether to
use SH or FB. However, it also adds more exibility to tackle a broader range of problems.
3.3 Practical Considerations and Challenge Results
In order to make best use of the successive halving algorithm we had to do certain adjust-
ments to obtain high performance.
First, we restricted the search space to contain only iterative algorithms and no more
feature preprocessing. This simplies the usage of SH as we only have to deal with a single
type of delity, the number of iterations, while we would otherwise have to also consider
dataset subsets as an alternative. This leaves us with extremely randomized trees (Geurts
4. Falkner et al. (2018) proposed using Hyperband (Li et al., 2018) together with BO; however, we use
only SH as we expect it to work better in the extreme of having very little time, as it more aggressively
reduces the budget per ML pipeline.
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
et al., 2006), random forests (Breimann, 2001), histogram-based gradient boosting (Fried-
man, 2001; Ke et al., 2017), a linear model tted with a passive aggressive algorithm (Cram-
mer et al., 2006) or stochastic gradient descent and a multi-layer perceptron. The exact
conguration space can be found in Table 18 of the appendix.
Second, because of using only iterative algorithms, we are able to store partially tted
models to disk to prevent having no predictions in case of time- and memouts. That is, after
2;4;8;::: iterations, we make predictions for the validation set and dump the model for
later usage. We provide further details, such as the restricted search space, in Appendix B.
For our submission to the second AutoML challenge, we implemented the following
safeguards and tricks (Feurer et al., 2018), which we do not use in this paper since we
instead focus on automatically designing a robust AutoML system:
•For the submission, we also employed support vector machines using subsets of the
dataset as lower delities. Since none of the ve nal ensembles in the competition
contained support vector machines, we did not consider them anymore for this paper,
simplifying our methodology.
•We developed an additional library pruning method for ensemble selection. However,
in preliminary experiments, we found that this, in the best case, provides an insignif-
icant boost for the area under curve and not balanced accuracy, which we use in this
work and thus did not follow up on that any further.
•To increase robustness against arbitrarily large datasets, we reduced all datasets to
have at most 500 features using univariate feature selection. Similarly, we also reduced
all datasets to have at most 45 000 datapoints using stratied subsampling. We do
not think these are good strategies in general and only implemented them because we
had no information about the dimensionality of the datasets used in the challenge,
and to prevent running out of time and memory. Retrospectively, only one out of ve
datasets triggered this feature selection step. Now, we have instead a fallback strategy
that is dened by data, see Section 4.1.1.
•In case the datasets had less than 1000 datapoints, we would have reverted from hold-
out to cross-validation. However, this fallback was not triggered due to the datasets
being larger in the competition.
•We manually added a linear regression tted with stochastic gradient descent with
its hyperparameters optimized for fast runtime as the rst entry in the portfolio to
maximize the chances of tting a model within the given time. We had implemented
this strategy because we did not know the time limit of the competition. However, as
for the paper at hand and future applications of Auto-sklearn , we expect to know the
optimization budget we are optimizing the portfolio for, we no longer require such a
safeguard.
Our submission, PoSH Auto-sklearn , was the overall winner of the second AutoML
challenge. We give the results of the competition in Table 1 and refer to Feurer et al. (2018)
and Guyon et al. (2019) for further details, especially for information on our competitors.
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
Name Rank Dataset #1 Dataset #2 Dataset #3 Dataset #4 Dataset #5
PoSH Auto-sklearn 2:8 0:5533(3) 0 :2839(4) 0:3932 (1)0:2635 (1) 0:6766(5)
narnars0 3 :8 0:5418(5) 0 :2894(2) 0 :3665(2) 0 :2005(9) 0:6922 (1)
Malik 5 :4 0:5085(7) 0 :2297(7) 0 :2670(6) 0 :2413(5) 0 :6853(2)
wlWangl 5 :4 0:5655 (2)0:4851 (1) 0:2829(5) 0:0886(16) 0 :6840(3)
thanhdng 5 :4 0:5131(6) 0 :2256(8) 0 :2605(7) 0 :2603(2) 0 :6777(4)
Table 1: Results for the second AutoML challenge (Guyon et al., 2019). Name is the team
name, Rank the nal rank of the submission, followed by the individual results on
the ve datasets used in the competition. All performances are the normalized area
under the ROC curve (Guyon et al., 2015) with the per-dataset rank in brackets.
In case a rank is missing, for example, rank 1 for dataset 1, this rank was achieved
by a contestant who did not place within the top 5.
3.4 Experimental Setup
So far, AutoML systems were designed without any optimization budget or with a single,
xed optimization budget Tin mind (see Equation 5).5Our system takes the optimiza-
tion budget into account when constructing the portfolio. We will study two optimiza-
tion budgets: a short, 10 minute optimization budget and a long, 60 minute optimization
budget as in the original Auto-sklearn paper. To have a single metric for binary classi-
cation, multiclass classication and unbalanced datasets, we report the balanced error
rate (1 balanced accuracy), following the 1stAutoML challenge (Guyon et al., 2019). As
dierent datasets can live on dierent scales, we apply a linear transformation to obtain
comparable values. Concretely, we obtain the minimal and maximal error obtained by ex-
ecuting Auto-sklearn with portfolios and using ensembles for each combination of model
selection and budget allocation strategies per dataset. Then, we rescale by subtracting
the minimal error and dividing by the dierence between the maximal and minimal error
(ADTM, as introduced in Section 3.1.1).6With this transformation, we obtain a normalized
error which can be interpreted as the regret of our method.
We also limit the time and memory for each ML pipeline evaluation. For the time limit,
we allow for at most 1 =10 of the optimization budget, while for the memory, we allow the
pipeline 4GB before forcefully terminating the execution.
3.4.1 Datasets
We require two disjoint sets of datasets for our setup: (i) Dmeta, on which we build portfolios
and the model-based policy selector that we will introduce in Section 4, and (ii) Dtest, on
which we evaluate our method. The distribution of both sets ideally spans a wide variety of
problem domains and dataset characteristics. For Dtest, we rely on 39 datasets selected for
5. The OBOE AutoML system (Yang et al., 2019) is a potential exception that takes the optimization
budget into consideration, but the experiments by Yang et al. (2019) were only conducted for a single
optimization budget, not demonstrating that the system adapts itself to multiple optimization budgets.
6. We would like to highlight that this is slightly dierent than in Section 3.1.1 where we did not have
access to the ensemble performance and also only normalized per model selection strategy.
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
Figure 3: Distribution of meta and test datasets. We visualize each dataset w.r.t. its meta-
features and highlight the datasets outside our meta distribution using black
crosses.
the AutoML benchmark proposed by Gijsbers et al. (2019), which consists of datasets for
comparing classiers (Bischl et al., 2021) and datasets from the AutoML challenges (Guyon
et al., 2019).
We collected the meta datasets Dmeta based on OpenML (Vanschoren et al., 2014)
using the OpenML-Python API (Feurer et al., 2021). To obtain a representative set, we
considered all datasets on OpenML with more than 500 and less than 1 000 000 samples
with at least two attributes. Next, we dropped all datasets that are sparse, contain time
attributes or string type attributes as Dtestdoes not contain any such datasets. Then, we
dropped synthetic datasets and subsampled clusters of highly similar datasets. Finally, we
manually checked for overlap with Dtestand ended up with a total of 208 training datasets
and used them to train our method.
We show the distribution of the datasets in Figure 3. Green points refer to Dmetaand
orange crosses to Dtest. We can see that Dmeta spans the underlying distribution of Dtest
quite well, but several datasets are outside the Dmeta distribution indicated by the green
lines, marked with a black cross. We give the full list of datasets for Dmeta andDtestin
Appendix E.
For all datasets, we use a single holdout test set of 33 :33%, which is dened by the
corresponding OpenML task. The remaining 66 :66% are the training data of our AutoML
systems, which handle further splits for model selection themselves based on the chosen
model selection strategy.
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
3.4.2 Meta-data Generation
For each optimization budget we created four performance matrices of size jDmetajjCj ,
see Section 3.1.1 for details on performance matrices. Each matrix refers to one way of
assessing the generalization error of a model: holdout, 3-fold CV, 5-fold CV or 10-fold CV.
To obtain each matrix, we did the following. For each dataset DinDmeta, we used combined
algorithm selection and hyperparameter optimization to nd a customized ML pipeline. In
practice, we ran Auto-sklearn without meta-learning and without ensemble building three
times and picked the best resulting ML pipeline on the test split of D. To ensure that Auto-
sklearn nds a good conguration, we ran it for ten times the optimization budget given
by the user (see Equation 5). Then, we ran the cross-product of all candidate ML pipelines
and datasets to obtain the performance matrix. We also stored intermediate results for the
iterative algorithms so that we could build custom portfolios for SH, too.
3.4.3 Other Experimental Details
We always report results averaged across 10 repetitions to account for randomness and
report the mean and standard deviation over these repetitions. To check whether perfor-
mance dierences are signicant, where possible, we ran the Wilcoxon signed-rank test as a
statistical hypothesis test with = 0:05 (Dem sar, 2006). In addition, we plot the average
rank as follows. For each dataset, we draw one run per method (out of 10 repetitions) and
rank these draws according to performance, using the average rank in case of ties. We then
average over all 39 dataset and repeat this sampling 500 times to and then plot the median
and the 10th and 90th percentile of these samples. In the case of only three methods to
compare, we can enumerate all 1000 combinations of the seeds and do so. We use the exact
method for Figure 6 and the sampling method for Figure 7 in the appendix.
We conducted all experiments using ensemble selection, and we constructed ensembles of
size 50 with replacement. We give results without ensemble selection in the Appendix B.2.
All experiments were conducted on a compute cluster with machines equipped with
2Intel Xeon Gold 6242 CPUs with 2.8GHz (32 cores) and 192 GB RAM, running Ubuntu
20.04.01. We provide scripts for reproducing all our experimental results at https://
github.com/automl/ASKL2.0_experiments and provide a clean integration of our methods
into the ocial Auto-sklearn repository.
3.5 Experimental Results
In this subsection, we now validate the improvements for PoSH Auto-sklearn . First, we will
compare using a portfolio to the previous KND approach and no warmstarting and second,
we will compare PoSH Auto-sklearn to the previous Auto-sklearn 1.0 .
3.5.1 Portfolio vs. KND
Here, we study the performance of the learned portfolio and compare it against Auto-sklearn
1.0's default meta-learning strategy using 25 congurations. Additionally, we also study
how pure BO would perform. We give results in Table 2.
For the new AutoML-hyperparameter jPj, we chose 32 to allow two full iterations of SH
with our hyperparameter setting of SH. Unsurprisingly, warmstarting, in general, improves
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
10 minutes 60 minutes
BO KND Port BO KND Port
FB; holdout 5:98 5:29 3:70 3:84 3:983:08
SH; holdout 5:15 4:82 4:11 3:77 3:553:19
FB; 3CV 8:52 7:76 6:90 6:42 6:314:96
SH; 3CV 7:82 7:67 6:16 6:08 5:915:17
FB; 5CV 9:48 9:45 7:93 6:64 6:475:05
SH; 5CV 9:48 8:85 7:05 6:19 5:835:40
FB; 10CV 16:10 15:1112:42 10:82 10:449:68
SH; 10CV 16:14 15:1012:61 10:54 10:339:23
Table 2: Averaged normalized balanced error rate. We report the aggregated performance
across 10 repetitions and 39 datasets of our AutoML system using only Bayesian
optimization ( BO), or BO warmstarted with k-nearest-datasets ( KND ) or a greedy
portfolio ( Port). Per line, we boldface the best mean value (per model selection and
budget allocation strategy and optimization budget, and underline results that are
not statistically dierent according to a Wilcoxon-signed-rank Test ( = 0:05)).
10MIN 60MIN
? std ? std
(1) PoSH-Auto-sklearn 4:110:093:190:12
(2) Auto-sklearn (1.0) 16 :21 0:27 7:170:30
Table 3: Final performance of PoSH Auto-sklearn and Auto-sklearn 1.0 . We report the
normalized balanced error rate averaged across 10 repetitions on 39 datasets. We
boldface the best mean value (per optimization budget) and underline results that
are not statistically dierent according to a Wilcoxon signed-rank test ( = 0:05).
the performance on all optimization budgets and most model selection strategies, often by
a large margin. The portfolios always improve over BO, while KND does so in all but
one case. When comparing the portfolios to KND, we nd that the raw results are always
favorable and that for half of the settings, the dierences are also signicant.
3.5.2 PoSH Auto-sklearn vsAuto-sklearn 1.0
We can also look at the performance of PoSH Auto-sklearn compared to Auto-sklearn 1.0 .
First, we compare the performance of PoSH Auto-sklearn toAuto-sklearn 1.0 using the
full search space, and we provide those numbers in Table 3. For both time horizons, there
is a strong reduction in the loss (10min: 16 :21!4:11 and 60min: 7 :17!3:19), indicating
that the proposed PoSH Auto-sklearn is indeed an improvement over the existing solution
and is able to t better machine learning models in the given time limit.
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
Second, we compare the performance of PoSH Auto-sklearn (SH; holdout and Port) to
Auto-sklearn 1.0 (FB; holdout and KND) using only the reduced search space based on
the results in Table 2. Again, there is a strong reduction in the loss for both time hori-
zons (10min: 5 :29!4:11 and 60min: 3 :98!3:19), conrming abovementioned ndings.
Combined with the portfolio, the average results are inconclusive about whether our use of
successive halving was the right choice or whether plain holdout would have been better.
We also provide the raw numbers in Appendix B.3, but they are inconclusive, too.
4. Part II: Automating Design Decisions in AutoML
The goal of AutoML is to yield state-of-the-art performance without requiring the user to
make low-level decisions, e.g., which model and hyperparameter congurations to apply.
Using a portfolio and SH, PoSH Auto-sklearn is already an improvement over Auto-sklearn
1.0in terms of eciency and scalability. However, high-level design decisions, such as
choosing between cross-validation and holdout or whether to use SH or not, remain. Thus,
PoSH Auto-sklearn , and AutoML systems in general, suer from a similar problem as they
are trying to solve, as users have set their arguments on a per-dataset basis manually.
To highlight this dilemma, in Figure 4 we show exemplary results comparing the bal-
anced error rates of the best ML pipeline found by searching our conguration space with
BO using holdout, 3CV, 5CV and 10CV with SH and FB on dierent optimization budgets
and datasets. The top row shows results obtained using the same optimization budget of
10 minutes on two dierent datasets. While FB; 10CV is best on dataset sylvine (top left)
the same strategy on median performs amongst the worst strategies on dataset adult (top
right). Also, on sylvine , SH performs overall slightly worse in contrast to adult , where SH
performs better on average. The bottom rows show how the given time-limit impacts the
performance on the dataset jungle chess 2pcs rawendgame complete . Using a quite restric-
tive optimization budget of 10 minutes (bottom left), SH; 3CV , which aggressively cuts ML
pipelines on lower budgets, performs best on average. With a higher optimization budget
(bottom right), the overall results improve and more strategies become competitive.
Therefore, we propose to extend AutoML systems with a policy selector to automatically
choose an optimization policy given a dataset (see Figure 1 in Section 1 for a schematic
overview). In this second part, we discuss the resulting approach, which led to Auto-sklearn
2.0as the rst implementation of it.
4.1 Automated Policy Selection
Specically, we consider the case, where an AutoML system can be run with dierent
optimization policies 2 and study how to further automate AutoML using algorithm
selection on this meta-meta level. In practice, we extend the formulation introduced in
Equation 7 to not use an AutoML system Awith a xed policy , but to contain a policy
selector  :D!:
GEV
(A;;Dmeta) =1
jDmetajjDmetajX
d=1GEV
(A(Dd)(Dd);Dd): (10)
In the remainder of this section, we describe how to construct such a policy selector.
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
Figure 4: Final balanced error rate of BO using dierent model selection strategies averaged
across 10 repetitions. Top row: Results for a optimization budget of 10 minutes
on two dierent datasets. Bottom row: Results for a optimization budget of 10
and 60 minutes on the same dataset.
4.1.1 Approach
AutoML systems themselves are often heavily hyperparameterized. In our case, we deem
the model selection strategy and budget allocation strategy (see Sections 3.2 and 6.4.1)
as important choices the user has to make when using an AutoML system to obtain high
performance. These decisions depend on both the given dataset and the available resources.
As there is also an interaction between the two strategies and the optimal portfolio P, we
consider here that the optimization policy is parameterized by a combination of (i) model
selection strategy, (ii) budget allocation strategy and (iii) a portfolio constructed for the
choice of the two strategies. In our case, these are eight dierent policies ( f3-fold CV, 5-fold
CV, 10-fold CV, holdout gf SH, FBg).
We introduce a new layer on top of AutoML systems that automatically selects a policy 
for a new dataset. We show an overview of this system in Figure 5 which consists of a
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
OptionalRepresentative
set of datasets
{D1,...,D|Dmeta |}For∀π∈π:
execute TR1-TR3:
construct portfolio PTR4: Execute AutoML
systems Aπ∀π∈π
on{D1,...,D|Dmeta |}TR5: Compute
meta-features of
{D1,...,D|Dmeta |}TR6: Con-
struct selector Ξ
MtL1: Compute meta-
features of Dnew,trainMtL2: Apply selector
Ξ to choose policy πTE1: Run
AutoML system Aπ
eval
Prun
BOTE2.1: Return best
found pipeline Mˆλ∗or
ensemble of pipelinesTE2.2: Report
loss on Dnew,testDnew,train Dnew Dnew,testTRain (oﬄine)
Meta-Learning/TEst (online)
Figure 5: Schematic overview of the proposed Auto-sklearn 2.0 system with the training
phase (TR1{TR6) above and the test phase (MtL1{MtL2&TE1{TE2) below the
dashed line. Rounded, purple boxes refer to computational steps, while rectan-
gular, orange boxes depict the input data to the AutoML system.
training (TR1{TR6) and a testing stage (MtL1{2 and TE1{TE2). In brief, in training steps
TR1{TR3, we perform the same steps that we have already outlined in Figure 2. However,
we now do so for each combination of model selection and budget allocation strategy. Our
policies are combinations of a portfolio, a model selection strategy and a budget allocation
strategy. We then execute the full AutoML system for each such policy in step TR4 to
obtain a realistic performance estimate. In step TR5, we compute meta-features and use
them together with the performance estimate from TR4 in step TR6 to train a model-based
policy selector , which we will use in the online test phase.
In order to not overestimate the performance of on a datasetDd, datasetDdmust not
be part of the meta-data for constructing the portfolio. To overcome this issue, we perform
an inner 5-fold cross-validation and build each on four fths of the meta -datasets Dmeta
and evaluate it on the left-out fth of meta -datasets Dmeta. For the nal AutoML system
we then use a portfolio built on all meta -datasets Dmeta.
For a new dataset Dnew2Dtest, we rst compute meta-features describing Dnew(MtL1)
and use the model-based policy selector from step TR6 to automatically select an appropri-
ate policy forDnewbased on the meta-features (MtL2). This will relieve users from making
this decision on their own. Given an optimization policy , we then apply the AutoML
systemAtoDnew(TE1). Finally, we return the best found pipeline M^based on the
training set ofDnew(TE2.1). Optionally, we can then compute the loss of M^on the
test set ofDnew(TE2.2); we emphasize that this would be the only time we ever access the
test set ofDnew. Steps TE1{TE2 are the same as in Figure 2, and the only dierence at
evaluation time is that we use algorithm selection to decide which policy to use at test
time instead of relying on a hand-picked one.
In the following, we describe two ways to construct a policy selector and introduce an
additional backup strategy to make it robust towards failures.
Constructing the single best policy A straightforward way to construct a selector
relies on the assumption that the meta -datasets Dmeta are homogeneous and that a new
dataset is similar to these. In such a case, we can use per-set algorithm selection (Kerschke
et al., 2019), which aims to nd the single algorithm that performs best on average on a set
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
hyperparameter type values
Min. number of samples to create a further split int [3 ;20]
Min. number of samples to create a new leaf int [2 ;20]
Max. depth of a tree int [0 ;20]
Max. number of features to be used for a split int [1 ;2]
Bootstrapping in the random forest cat fyes;nog
Soft or hard voting when combining models cat fsoft;hardg
Error value scaling to compute dataset weights cat see text
Table 4: conguration space of the model-based policy selector.
of problem instances. In our context, it aims to nd the combination of model selection and
budget allocation that is best on average for the given set of meta -datasets Dmeta. This
single best policy is then the automated replacement for our manual selection of SH and
holdout in PoSH Auto-sklearn . While this seems to be a trivial baseline, it actually requires
the same amount of compute power as the more elaborate strategy we introduce next.
Constructing the per-dataset Policy Selector Instead of using a xed, learned policy,
we now propose to adapt the policy to the dataset at hand by using per-instance algorithm
selection, which means we select the appropriate algorithm for each dataset by taking its
properties into account. To construct the meta selection model (TR6), we follow the policy
selector design of HydraMIP (Xu et al., 2011): for each pair of AutoML policies, we t
a random forest to predict whether policy Aoutperforms policy Bgiven the current
dataset's meta-features. Since the misclassication loss depends on the dierence between
the losses of the two policies (i.e. the ADTM when choosing the wrong policy), we weight
each meta-observation by their loss dierence. To make errors comparable across dierent
datasets (Bardenet et al., 2013), we scale the individual error values for each dataset. At
test time (TE2), we query all pairwise models for the given meta-features and use voting
for  to choose a policy . We will refer to this strategy as the Policy Selector .
To improve the performance of the model-based policy selector, we applied BO to op-
timize the model-based policy selector's hyperparameters to minimize the cross-validation
error (Lindauer et al., 2015). We optimized in total seven hyperparameters, ve of which
are related to the random forest, one is how to combine the pairwise models to get a pre-
diction, and the last one is the strategy of how to scale error values to compute weights for
comparing datasets, i.e. using the raw observations, scale with [ min;max ] / [min; 1] across
a pair or all policies or use the dierence in ranks as the weight (see Table 4). Hyperpa-
rameters are shared between all pairwise models to avoid factorial growth of the number of
hyperparameters with the number of new model selection strategies. We allow a tree depth
of 0, i.e., a tree with all data in a single leaf, which is equivalent to the single best strategy
described above.
Meta-Features. To train our model-based policy selector and to select a policy, as well
to use the backup strategy, we use meta-features (Brazdil et al., 2008; Vanschoren, 2019)
describing all meta-train datasets (TR5) and new datasets (TE1). To avoid the problems
discussed in Section 3.1 we only use very simple and robust meta-features, which can be
19

--- PAGE 20 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
reliably computed in linear time for every dataset: 1) the number of datapoints and 2) the
number of features. In fact, these are already stored as meta-data for the data structure
holding the dataset. Using only these two meta-features for the selector can be regarded
as learning the manually-designed fallbacks that we discussed in Section 3.3. In our ex-
periments, we will show that even with only these trivial and cheap meta-features, we can
substantially improve over a static policy.
Backup strategy. Since there is no guarantee that our model-based policy selector will
extrapolate well to datasets outside of the meta-datasets, we implement a fallback measure
to avoid failures. Such failures can be harmful if a new dataset is, e.g., much larger than
any dataset in the meta-dataset, and the model-based policy selector proposes to use a
policy that would time out without any solution. More specically, if there is no dataset
in the meta-datasets that has higher or equal values for each meta-feature (i.e. dominates
the dataset meta-features), our system falls back to use holdout with SH, which is the most
aggressive and cheapest policy we consider. We visualize this in Figure 3 where we mark
datasets outside our meta distribution using black crosses.
4.2 Experimental Results
To study the performance of the policy selector, we compare it to PoSH Auto-sklearn as
described in Section 3 and Auto-sklearn 1.0 . From now on we refer to PoSH Auto-sklearn
+ policy selector as Auto-sklearn 2.0 . As before, we study two horizons, 10 minutes and 60
minutes, and use versions of PoSH Auto-sklearn andAuto-sklearn 2.0 that were constructed
with these time horizons in mind. Similarly, we use the same 208 datasets for constructing
our AutoML systems and the same 39 for evaluating them.
Looking at Table 5, we see that Auto-sklearn 2.0 achieves the lowest error, being signif-
icantly better for both optimization budgets. Most notably, Auto-sklearn 2.0 reduces the
relative error compared to Auto-sklearn 1.0 by 78% (10MIN) and 65%, respectively, which
means a reduction by a factor of 4 :5 and three.
It turns out that these results are skewed by several large datasets (task IDs 189873
and 75193 for both horizons; 189866, 189874, 168796 and 168797 only for the ten minutes
horizon) on which the KND initialization of Auto-sklearn 1.0 only suggests ML pipelines
10MIN 60MIN
? std ? std
(1) Auto-sklearn (2.0) 3:580:232:470:18
(2) PoSH-Auto-sklearn 4 :11 0:09 3:19 0:12
(3) Auto-sklearn (1.0) 16 :21 0:27 7:17 0:30
Table 5: Average normalized balanced error (ADTM, lower is better) of Auto-sklearn 2.0 ,
PoSH Auto-sklearn and Auto-sklearn 1.0 averaged across 10 repetitions on 39
datasets. We boldface the best mean value (per optimization budget) and under-
line results that are not statistically dierent according to a Wilcoxon-signed-rank
Test (= 0:05).
20

--- PAGE 21 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
time [min]1.41.61.82.02.22.42.62.8average rankAuto-sklearn (2.0)
PoSH-Auto-sklearn
Auto-sklearn (1.0)
Figure 6: Performance over time. We report the median ranks (lower is better) and the
10th and 90th percentiles over time for Auto-sklearn 2.0 and the previous Au-
toML systems. Concretely, we compute the mean rank for for all 39 for all 1000
combinations of the 10 seeds of the 3 AutoML systems, and compute the median
and percentiles of these 1000 average ranks.
that time out or hit the memory limit and thus exhaust the optimization budget for the
full conguration space. Our new AutoML system does not suer from this problem as it
a) selects SH to avoid spending too much time on unpromising ML pipelines and b) can
return predictions and results even if an ML pipeline was not evaluated for the full budget
or converged early; and even after removing the datasets in question from the average, the
performance of Auto-sklearn 1.0 is substantially worse than that Auto-sklearn 2.0 .
When looking at the intermediate system, i.e. PoSH Auto-sklearn , we nd that it
outperforms Auto-sklearn 1.0 in terms of the normalized balanced error rate, but that the
additional step of selecting the model selection and budget allocation strategy gives Auto-
sklearn 2.0 an edge. When not considering the large datasets Auto-sklearn 1.0 failed on,
their performance becomes very similar.
Figure 6 provides another view on the results, presenting average ranks (where failures
obtain less weight compared to the averaged performance). Auto-sklearn 2.0 is still able
to deliver best results, PoSH Auto-sklearn should be preferred to Auto-sklearn 1.0 for the
rst 30 minutes and then converges to roughly the same ranking.
4.3 Ablation
Now, we study the contribution of each of our improvements in an ablation study. We
iteratively disable one component and compare the performance to the entire system using
the 39 datasets from the AutoML benchmark as done in the previous experimental sections.
21

--- PAGE 22 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
These components are (1) using a per-dataset model-based policy selector to choose a policy,
(2) using only a subset of the available policies, and (3) warmstarting BO with a portfolio.
4.3.1 Do we need per-dataset selection?
We rst examine how much performance we gain by having a model-based policy selector
to decide between dierent AutoML strategies based on meta-features and how to con-
struct this model-based policy selector, or whether it is sucient to select a single strategy
based on meta-training datasets. We compare the performance of the entire system us-
ing a model-based policy selector to using a single, static strategy (single best) and both,
the model-based policy selector and the single best, without the fallback mechanism for
out-of-distribution datasets and give all results in Table 6. We also provide two additional
baselines: a random baseline, which randomly assigns a policy to a run and an oracle
baseline, which marks the lowest possible error that can be achieved by any of the policies.7
First, we compare the performance of the model-based policy selector with the single
best. We can observe that for 10 minutes, there is a slight improvement in terms of perfor-
mance, while the performance for 60 minutes is almost equal. While there is no signicant
dierence to the single best for 10 minutes, there is for 60 minutes. These numbers can be
compared with Table 2 to see how we fare against picking a single policy by hand. We nd
that our proposed algorithm selection compares favorably, especially for the longer time
horizon.
Second, to study how much resources we need to spend on generating training data for
our model-based policy selector, we consider three approaches: (P) only using the portfolio
performance which we pre-computed and stored in the performance matrices as described
in Section 3.1.1, (P+BO) actually running Auto-sklearn using the portfolio and BO for
10 and 60 minutes, respectively, and (P+BO+E) additionally also constructing ensembles,
which yields the most realistic meta-data. Running BO on all 208 datasets (P+BO) is by
far more expensive than the table lookups (P); building an ensemble (P+BO+E) adds only
several seconds to minutes on top compared to (P+BO).
For both optimization budgets using P+BO yields the best results using the model-
based policy selector closely followed by P+BO+ENS, see Table 6. The cheapest method,
P, yields the worst results showing that it is worth investing resources into computing good
meta-data. Surprisingly, looking at the single best, performance gets worse when using
seemingly better meta-data. We investigated the reason why P+BO performs slightly better
than P+BO+ENS. When using a model-based policy selector, this can be explained by a
single dataset for both time horizons for which the policy chosen by the model-based policy
selector is worse than the single best policy. When looking at the single best, there is no
single dataset which stands out. To summarize, investing additional resources to compute
realistic meta-data results in improved performance, but so far, it appears that having
the eect of BO in the meta-data is sucient, while the ensemble seems to lead to lower
meta-data quality.
7. We would like to note that the oracle performance can be unequal to zero because we normalize the
results using the single best test loss found for a single model to normalize the results. When evaluating
the best policy on a dataset, this most likely results in selecting a model on the validation set that is
not the single best model on the test set we use to normalize data.
22

--- PAGE 23 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
10 Min 60 Min
trained on P P+BO P+BO+E P P+BO P+BO+E
model-based policy selector 3 :583.56 3:58 2:532.32 2:47
model-based policy selector w/o fallback 5 :435:68 4:79 4:98 5:36 5:43
single best 3 :88 3:67 3:69 2:49 2:38 2:44
single best w/o fallback 5 :18 6:38 6:40 5:10 5:01 5:07
oracle 2 :33 1 :22
random 8 :32 6 :18
Table 6: Average normalized balanced error (ADTM, lower is better) for 10 and 60 minutes.
We report the performance for the model-based policy selector policy and the single
best when trained on dierent data obtained on Dmeta (P = Portfolio, BO =
Bayesian Optimization, E = Ensemble) as well as the model-based policy selector
without the fallback . The second part of the table shows the results of always
choosing the best policy on the test set ( oracle ) and results for choosing a random
policy ( random ) as baselines. We boldface the best mean value (per optimization
budget) and underline results that are not statistically dierent according to a
Wilcoxon-signed-rank Test ( = 0:05).
Finally, we also take a closer look at the impact of the fallback mechanism to verify that
our improvements are not solely due to this component. We observe that the performance
drops for all policy selection strategies that do not use the fallback mechanism. For the
shorter 10 minutes setting, we nd that the model-based policy selector still outperforms
the single best, while for the longer 60 minutes setting, the single best leads to better
performance. The rather stark performance degradation compared to the regular model-
based policy selector can mainly be explained by a few, huge datasets, to which the model-
based policy selector cannot extrapolate (and which the single best does not account for).
Based on these observations, we suggest research into an adaptive fallback strategy that
can change the model selection strategy during the execution of the AutoML system so
that a policy selector can be used on out-of-distribution datasets. We conclude that using
a model-based policy selector is benecial, and using a fallback strategy to cope with out-
of-distribution datasets can substantially improve performance.
4.3.2 Do we need different model selection strategies?
Next, we study whether we need the dierent model selection strategies. For this, we
build model-based policy selectors on dierent subsets of the available eight combinations
of model selection strategies and budget allocations: f3-fold CV, 5-fold CV, 10-fold CV,
holdoutgf SH, FBg.Only Holdout consists of holdout with SH or FB (2 combinations),
Only CV comprises 3-fold CV, 5-fold CV and 10-fold CV, all of them with SH or FB (6
combinations), FBcontains both holdout and cross-validation and assigns each pipeline
evaluation the same budget (4 combinations) and Only SH uses SH to assign budgets (4
combinations).
23

--- PAGE 24 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
Selector Random Oracle
? std ? std ? std
10 MinAll 3.58 0.23 7.46 2.02 2.33 0.06
Only Holdout 4.03 0.14 3.78 0.23 3.23 0.10
Only CV 6.11 0.11 8.66 0.70 5.28 0.06
Only FB 3.50 0.20 7.64 2.00 2.59 0.09
Only SH 3.63 0.19 6.95 1.98 2.75 0.07
60 MinAll 2.47 0.18 5.64 1.95 1.22 0.08
Only Holdout 3.18 0.15 3.13 0.12 2.62 0.07
Only CV 5.09 0.19 6.85 0.86 3.94 0.10
Only FB 2.39 0.18 5.46 1.52 1.51 0.06
Only SH 2.44 0.24 5.13 1.72 1.68 0.12
Table 7: Average Normalized balanced error (ADTM, lower is better) for the full system
and when not considering all model selection strategies.
In Table 7, we compare the performance of selecting a policy at random (random), the
performance of selecting the best policy on the test set and thus giving a lower bound on the
ADTM (oracle) and our model-based policy selector. The oracle indicates the best possible
performance with each of these subsets of model selection strategies. It turns out that
both Only Holdout andOnly CV have a much worse oracle performance than All, with the
oracle performance of Only CV being even worse than the performance of the model-based
policy selector for All. Looking at Full budget (FB), it turns out that this subset would
be slightly preferable in terms of performance with a policy selector. However, the oracle
performance is worse than that of Allwhich shows that there is some complementarity
between the dierent policies which cannot yet be exploited by the policy selector. For
Only Holdout , surprisingly, the random policy selector performs slightly better than the
model-based policy selector. We attribute this to the fact that holdout with both SH and
FB performs similarly and that the choice between these two cannot yet be learned, possibly
also indicated by the close performance of the random selector.
These results show that a large variety of available model selection strategies to choose
from increases best possible performances. However, they also show that a model-based
policy selector cannot yet necessarily leverage this potential. This questions the usefulness
of choosing from all model selection strategies, similar to a recent nding which proves that
increasing the number of dierent policies a policy selector can choose from leads to reduced
generalization (Balcan et al., 2021). However, we believe this points to the research question
of whether we can learn on the meta-datasets which model selection and budget allocation
strategies to include in the set of strategies to choose from. Also, with an ever-growing
availability of meta-datasets and continued research on robust policy selectors, we expect
this exibility to eventually yield improved performance.
24

--- PAGE 25 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
10min 60min
? std ? std
With PortfolioPolicy selector 3.58 0.23 2.47 0.18
Single best 3.69 0.14 2.44 0.12
Without PortfolioPolicy selector 5.63 0.89 3.42 0.32
Single best 5.37 0.58 3.61 0.61
Table 8: Average normalized balanced error (ADTM, lower is better) after 10 and after 60
minutes with portfolios (top) and without (bottom). The row "with portfolio"
and "policy selector" constitutes the full AutoML system including portfolios,
BO and ensembles) and the row "without portfolios" and "policy selector" only
removes the portfolios (both from the meta-data for model-based policy selector
construction and at runtime). We boldface the best mean value (per optimization
budget) and underline results that are not statistically dierent according to a
Wilcoxon-signed-rank Test ( = 0:05).
4.3.3 Do we still need to warm-start Bayesian optimization?
Last, we analyze the impact of the portfolio. Given the other improvements, we now discuss
whether we still need to add the additional complexity and invest resources to warm-start
BO (and can therefore save the time to build the performance matrices to construct the
portfolios). For this study, we completely remove the portfolio from our AutoML system,
meaning that we directly start with BO and construct ensembles { both for creating the
data we train our policy selector on and for reporting performance. We report the results
in Table 8.
Comparing the performance of an AutoML system with a model-based policy selector
with and without portfolios (Row 1 and 3), there is a clear drop in performance when
disabling the portfolios. Comparing Rows 2 and 4 also demonstrates that a portfolio is
necessary when using the single best policy. This ablation highlights the importance of
initializing the search procedure of AutoML systems with well-performing pipelines.
5. Comparison to other AutoML systems
Having established that Auto-sklearn 2.0 does indeed improve over Auto-sklearn 1.0 , we now
compare our system to other well established AutoML systems. For this, we use the publicly
available AutoML benchmark suite which denes a xed benchmarking environment for
AutoML systems (Gijsbers et al., 2019) comparisons. We use the original implementation
of the benchmark and compare Auto-sklearn 1.0 and Auto-sklearn 2.0 to the provided
implementations of Auto-WEKA (Thornton et al., 2013), TPOT (Olson et al., 2016a,b),
H2O AutoML (LeDell and Poirier, 2020) and a random forest baseline with hyperparameter
tuning on 39 datasets as implemented by the benchmark suite. These 39 datasets are the
same datasets as in Dtestand we provide details in Table 20 in the appendix.
25

--- PAGE 26 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
5.1 Integration and setup
To avoid hardware-dependent performance dierences, we (re-)ran all AutoML systems on
our local hardware (see Section 3.4.3). We used the pre-dened 1h8c setting, which divides
each dataset into ten folds and gives each framework one hour on eight CPU cores to pro-
duce a nal model. We furthermore assigned each run 32GB of RAM, which a SLURM
cluster manager controlls. In addition, we conducted ve repeats to account for random-
ness. The benchmark comes with Docker containers (Merkel, 2014). However, Docker
requires superuser access on the execution nodes, which is not available on our compute
cluster. Therefore, we extended the AutoML benchmark with support for Singularity im-
ages (Kurtzer et al., 2017), and used them to isolate the framework installations from each
other. For reproducibility, we give the exact versions we used in Table 17 in the Appendix.
The default resource allocation of the AutoML benchmark is a highly parallel set-
ting with eight cores. We chose the most straightforward way of making use of these
resources for Auto-sklearn and evaluated eight ML pipelines in parallel, assigning each
totalmemory=num cores RAM, which are 4GB. This allows us to evaluate congurations
obtained from the portfolio or KND in parallel but also requires a parallel strategy for run-
ning BO afterwards. We extended the Bayesian optimization package SMAC3 (Lindauer
et al., 2022) to allow for asynchronous parallel optimization. In preliminary experiments,
we found that the inherent randomness of the random forest used by SMAC combined
with the interleaved random search of SMAC is sucient to obtain results that perform a
lot better than the previous parallelism implemented in Auto-sklearn via SMAC (Ramage,
2015). Whenever a pipeline nishes training, Auto-sklearn checks whether there is an in-
stance of the ensemble construction running, and if not, it uses one of the eight slots to
conduct ensemble building and otherwise continues to t a new pipeline. We implemented
this version of parallel Auto-sklearn using Dask (Dask Development Team, 2016).
5.2 Results
We give results for the AutoML benchmark in Table 9. For each dataset, we give the average
performance of the AutoML systems across all ten folds and ve repetitions and boldface
the one with the lowest error (we cannot give any information about whether dierences
are signicant as we cannot compute signicances on cross-validation folds as described by
Bengio and Grandvalet, 2004).
We report the log loss for multiclass datasets and 1  AUC for binary datasets (lower
is better). In addition, we provide the average rank as an aggregate measure (computed by
averaging all folds and repetitions per dataset and then computing the rank). Furthermore,
we count how often each framework is the winner on a dataset (champion), and give the
losses, wins and ties against Auto-sklearn 2.0 . We then use these to perform a binomial
sign test (Dem sar, 2006) to compare the individual algorithms against Auto-sklearn 2.0 .
The results in Table 9 show that none of the AutoML systems is best on all datasets, and
even the TunedRF performs best on a few datasets. However, we can also observe that the
proposed Auto-sklearn 2.0 has the lowest average rank. It is followed by H2O AutoML and
Auto-sklearn 1.0 which perform roughly en par wrt the ranking scores and the number of
times they are the winner on a dataset. According to both aggregate metrics, the TunedRF,
Auto-WEKA and TPOT cannot keep up and lead to substantially worse results. Finally,
26

--- PAGE 27 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
AS 2.0 AS 1.0 AW TPOT H2O TunedRF
adult 0 :0692 0 :0701 0 :0920 0 :0750 0:0690 0:0902
airlines 0 :2724 0 :2726 0 :3241 0 :2758 0:2682 -
albert 0 :2413 0:2381 - 0 :2681 0 :2530 0 :2616
amazon 0 :1233 0 :1412 0 :1836 0 :1345 0:1218 0:1377
apsfailure 0 :0085 0:0081 0:0365 0 :0099 0 :0081 0 :0087
australian 0:0594 0:0702 0 :0709 0 :0670 0 :0607 0 :0610
bank-marketing 0:0607 0:0616 0 :1441 0 :0664 0 :0610 0 :0692
blood-transfusion 0:2428 0:2474 0 :2619 0 :2761 0 :2430 0 :3122
car 0:0012 0:0046 0 :1910 2 :7843 0 :0032 0 :0421
christine 0 :1821 0:1703 0:2026 0 :1821 0 :1763 0 :1908
cnae-9 0:1424 0:1779 0 :7045 0 :1483 0 :1807 0 :3119
connect-4 0 :3387 0 :3535 1 :7083 0 :3856 0:3127 0:4777
covertype 0:1103 0:1435 3 :3515 0 :5332 0 :1281 -
credit-g 0 :2031 0 :2159 0 :2505 0 :2144 0 :2078 0:1985
dilbert 0 :0399 0:0332 2:0791 0 :1153 0 :0359 0 :3283
dionis 0:5620 0:7171 - - 4 :7758 -
fabert 0 :7386 0 :7466 5 :4784 0 :8431 0:7274 0:8060
fashion-mnist 0:2511 0:2524 0 :9505 0 :4314 0 :2762 0 :3613
guillermo 0 :0945 0:0871 0:1251 0 :1680 0 :0911 0 :0973
helena 2:4974 2:5432 14 :3523 2 :8738 2 :7578 -
higgs 0:1824 0:1846 0 :3379 0 :1969 0 :1846 0 :1966
jannis 0 :6709 0:6637 2:9576 0 :7244 0 :6695 0 :7288
jasmine 0 :1141 0 :1196 0 :1356 0 :1123 0 :1141 0:1118
jungle chess 0 :2104 0 :1956 1 :6969 0 :9557 0:1479 0:4020
kc1 0 :1611 0 :1594 0 :1780 0:1530 0:1745 0 :1590
kddcup09 0:1580 0:1632 - 0 :1696 0 :1636 0 :2058
kr-vs-kp 0:0001 0:0003 0 :0217 0 :0003 0 :0002 0 :0004
mfeat-factors 0:0726 0:0901 0 :5678 0 :1049 0 :1009 0 :2091
miniboone 0:0121 0:0128 0 :0352 0 :0177 0 :0129 0 :0183
nomao 0:0035 0:0039 0 :0157 0 :0047 0 :0036 0 :0049
numerai28.6 0 :4696 0 :4705 0 :4729 0 :4741 0:4695 0:4792
phoneme 0:0299 0:0366 0 :0416 0 :0307 0 :0325 0 :0347
riccardo 0 :0002 0:0002 0:0020 0 :0021 0 :0003 0 :0002
robert 1 :4302 1:3800 - 1 :8600 1 :4927 1 :6877
segment 0:1482 0:1749 1 :2497 0 :1660 0 :1580 0 :1718
shuttle 0:0002 0:0004 0 :0100 0 :0008 0 :0004 0 :0006
sylvine 0 :0105 0 :0091 0 :0290 0:0075 0:0106 0 :0159
vehicle 0 :3341 0 :3754 2 :0662 0 :4402 0:3067 0:4839
volkert 0:7477 0:7862 3 :4235 0 :9852 0 :8121 0 :9792
Rank 1:79 2:64 5 :72 4 :08 2 :38 4 :38
Best performance 19 8 0 2 8 2
Wins/Losses/Ties of AS 2.0 - 28 =11=0 39 =0=0 35 =4=0 26 =13=0 36 =3=0
P-values (AS 2.0 vs. other methods), - :009 < :000 < :000 :053 < :000
based on a Binomial sign test
Table 9: Results of the AutoML benchmark averaged across ve repetitions. We report log
loss for multiclass datasets and 1  AUC for binary classication datasets (lower is
better). AS is short for Auto-sklearn and AW for Auto-WEKA .Auto-sklearn has
the best overall rank, the best performance in most datasets and, based on the P-
values of a Binomial sign test, we gain further condence in its strong performance.
27

--- PAGE 28 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
both versions of Auto-sklearn appear to be quite robust as they reliably provide results on
all datasets, including the largest ones where several of the other methods fail.
6. Related Work
We now present related work on our individual contributions (portfolios, model selection
strategies, and algorithm selection) as well as on related AutoML systems.
6.1 Related Work on Portfolios
Portfolios were introduced for hard combinatorial optimization problems, where the run-
time between dierent algorithms varies drastically and allocating time shares to multiple
algorithms instead of allocating all available time to a single one reduces the average cost
for solving a problem (Huberman et al., 1997; Gomes and Selman, 2001), and had applica-
tions in dierent sub-elds of AI (Smith-Miles, 2008; Kottho, 2014; Kerschke et al., 2019).
Algorithm portfolios were introduced to ML by the name of algorithm ranking to reduce
the required time to perform model selection compared to running all algorithms under
consideration (Brazdil and Soares, 2000; Soares and Brazdil, 2000), ignoring redundant
ones (Brazdil et al., 2001). ML portfolios can be superior to hyperparameter optimization
with Bayesian optimization (Wistuba et al., 2015b), Bayesian optimization with a model
which takes past performance data into account (Wistuba et al., 2015a) or can be ap-
plied when there is simply no time to perform full hyperparameter optimization (Feurer
et al., 2018). Furthermore, such a portfolio-based model-free optimization is both easier to
implement than regular Bayesian optimization and meta-feature based solutions, and the
portfolio can be shared easily across researchers and practitioners without the necessity of
sharing meta-data (Wistuba et al., 2015a,b; Psterer et al., 2018) or additional hyperpa-
rameter optimization software. Here, our goal is to have strong hyperparameter settings
when there is no time to optimize with a typical black-box algorithm.
The ecient creation of algorithm portfolios is an active area of research with the Greedy
Algorithm being a popular choice (Xu et al., 2010, 2011; Seipp et al., 2015; Wistuba et al.,
2015b; Lindauer et al., 2017; Feurer et al., 2018; Feurer and Hutter, 2018) due to its sim-
plicity. Wistuba et al. (2015b) rst proposed the use of the Greedy Algorithm for pipelines
of ML portfolios, minimizing the average rank on meta-datasets for a single ML algorithm.
Later, they extended their work to update the members of a portfolio in a round-robin
fashion, this time using the average normalized misclassication error as a loss function and
relying on a Gaussian process model (Wistuba et al., 2015a). The loss function of the rst
method does not optimize the metric of interest, while the second method requires a model
and does not guarantee that well-performing algorithms are executed early on, which could
be harmful under time constraints.
Research into the Greedy Algorithm continued after our submission to the second Au-
toML challenge and the publication of the employed methods (Feurer et al., 2018). Psterer
et al. (2018) suggested using a set of default values to simplify hyperparameter optimiza-
tion. They argued that constructing an optimal portfolio of hyperparameter settings is
a generalization of the Maximum coverage problem and propose two solutions based on
Mixed Integer Programming and the Greedy Algorithm which we also use as the base of
our algorithm. The greedy algorithm recently also drew interest in deep learning research,
28

--- PAGE 29 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
where it was applied in its basic form for tuning the hyperparameters of the popular ADAM
algorithm (Metz et al., 2020).
Extending these portfolio strategies, which are learned oine, there are online portfolios
that can select from a xed set of machine learning pipelines, taking previous evaluations
into account (Leite et al., 2012; Wistuba et al., 2015a,b; Fusi et al., 2018; Yang et al.,
2019, 2020). However, such methods cannot be directly combined with all budget alloca-
tion strategies as they require the denition of a special model for extrapolating learning
curves (Klein et al., 2017b; Falkner et al., 2018) and also introduce additional complexity
into AutoML systems.
There exists other work on building portfolios without prior discretization (which we do
for our work and was done for most work mentioned above), which directly optimizes the
hyperparameters of ML pipelines to add next to the portfolio in a greedy fashion (Xu et al.,
2010, 2011; Seipp et al., 2015), to jointly optimize all congurations of the portfolio with
global optimization (Winkelmolen et al., 2020), and also to build parallel portfolios (Lin-
dauer et al., 2017). We consider these to be orthogonal to using portfolios in the rst place
and plan to study improved optimization strategies in future work.
6.2 Related Work on Successive Halving
Large datasets, expensive ML pipelines and tight resource limitations demand sophisticated
methods to speed up pipeline selection. One line of research, multi-delity optimization
methods, tackle this problem by using cheaper approximations of the objective of interest.
Practical examples are evaluating a pipeline only on a subset of the dataset or for iterative
algorithms limiting the number of iterations. There exists a large body of research on
optimization methods leveraging lower delities, for example working with a xed set of
auxiliary tasks (Forrester et al., 2007; Swersky et al., 2013; Poloczek et al., 2017; Moss
et al., 2020), solutions for specic model classes (Swersky et al., 2014; Domhan et al.,
2015; Chandrashekaran and Lane, 2017) and selecting a delity value from a continuous
range (Klein et al., 2017a; Kandasamy et al., 2017; Wu et al., 2020; Takeno et al., 2020).
Here, we focus on a methodologically simple bandit strategy, SH (Karnin et al., 2013;
Jamieson and Talwalkar, 2016), which successively reduces the number of candidates and at
the same time increases the allocated resources per run till only one candidate remains. Our
use of SH in the 2nd AutoML challenge also inspired work on combining a genetic algorithm
with SH (Parmentier et al., 2019). Another way of quickly discarding unpromising pipelines
is the intensify procedure which was used by Auto-WEKA (Thornton et al., 2013) to speed
up cross-validation. Instead of evaluating all folds at once, it evaluates the folds in an
iterative fashion. After each evaluation, the average performance on the evaluated folds is
compared to the performance of the so-far best pipeline on these folds. The evaluation is
only continued if the performance is equal or better. While this allows evaluating many
congurations in a short time, it cannot be combined with post-hoc ensembling and reduces
the cost of a pipeline to, at most, the cost of holdout, which might already be too high.
6.3 Related Work on Algorithm Selection
Automatically choosing a model selection strategy to assess the performance of an ML
pipeline for hyperparameter optimization has not previously been tackled, and only Guyon
29

--- PAGE 30 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
et al. (2015) acknowledge the lack of such an approach. However, treating the choice of
model selection strategy as an algorithm selection problem allows us to apply methods from
the eld of algorithm selection (Smith-Miles, 2008; Kottho, 2014; Kerschke et al., 2019)
and we can in future work reuse existing techniques besides the pairwise classication we
employ in this paper (Xu et al., 2011), such as the AutoAI system AutoFolio (Lindauer
et al., 2015).
6.4 Background on AutoML Systems and Their Components
AutoML systems have recently gained traction in the research community, and there exists
a multitude of approaches, often accompanied by open-source software. In the following,
we provide background on the main components of AutoML frameworks before describing
several prominent instantiations in more depth.
6.4.1 Components of AutoML systems
AutoML systems require a exible pipeline conguration space and are driven by an ecient
method to search this space. Furthermore, they rely on model selection and budget allo-
cation strategies when evaluating dierent pipelines. Additionally, to speed up the search
procedure, information gained on other datasets can be used to kick-start or guide the
search procedure (i.e. meta-learning). Finally, one can also combine the models trained
during the search phase in a post-hoc ensembling step.
Conguration Space and Search Mechanism While there are conguration space
formulations that allow the application of multiple search mechanisms, not all formulations
of a conguration space and a search mechanism can be mixed and matched, and we,
therefore, describe the dierent formulations and the applicable search mechanisms in turn.
The most common description of the search space is the CASH formulation. There
is a xed amount of hyperparameters, each with a range of legal values or categorical
choices, and some of them can be conditional, meaning that they are only active if other
hyperparameters fulll certain conditions. One such example is the choice of a classication
algorithm and its hyperparameters. The hyperparameters of an SVM are only active if the
categorical hyperparameter of the classication algorithm is set to SVM.
Standard black-box optimization algorithms can solve the CASH problem, and SMAC
(Hutter et al., 2011) and TPE (Bergstra et al., 2011) were proposed rst for this task.
Others proposed the use of evolutionary algorithms (B urger and Pauli, 2015) and random
search (LeDell and Poirier, 2020). It is also known as the full model selection problem (Es-
calante et al., 2009), and solutions in that strain of work proposed the use of particle swarm
optimization (Escalante et al., 2009) and a combination of a genetic algorithm with par-
ticle swarm optimization (Sun et al., 2013). To improve performance one can prune the
conguration space to reduce the size of the space the optimization algorithm has to search
through (Zhang et al., 2016), split the conguration space into smaller, more manageable
subspaces (Alaa and van der Schaar, 2018; Liu et al., 2020), or heavily employ expert
knowledge (LeDell and Poirier, 2020).
Instead of a xed conguration space, genetic programming can make use of a exible
and possibly innite space of components to be connected (Olson et al., 2016b,a). This
approach can be formalized further by using grammar-based genetic programming (de Sa
30

--- PAGE 31 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
et al., 2017). Context-free grammars can also be searched by model-based reinforcement
learning algorithms (Drori et al., 2019).
Formalizing the search problem as a search tree allows the application of a custom
Monte-Carlo tree search (Rakotoarison et al., 2019) and hierarchical task networks with
best-rst search (Mohr et al., 2018). With discrete spaces it is also possible to use combina-
tions of meta-learning and matrix factorization (Yang et al., 2019, 2020; Fusi et al., 2018).
In the special case of using only neural networks in an AutoML system it is possible to stick
with standard black-box optimization (Mendoza et al., 2016, 2019; Zimmer et al., 2021),
but one can also employ recent advances in neural architecture search (Elsken et al., 2019).
Meta-Learning. When there is knowledge about previous runs of the AutoML system
on other datasets available, it is possible to employ meta-learning. One option is to dene
a dataset similarity measure, often by using hand-crafted meta-features which describe the
datasets (Brazdil et al., 1994), to use the best solutions on the closest seen datasets to
warmstart the search algorithm (Feurer et al., 2015a). While this way of meta-learning can
be seen as an add-on to existing methods, other works use search strategies designed to
take meta-learning into account, for example matrix factorization (Yang et al., 2019, 2020;
Fusi et al., 2018) or reinforcement learning (Drori et al., 2019; Heetz et al., 2020).
Model Selection. Given training data, the goal of an AutoML system is to nd the best
performing ML pipeline. Doing so requires to best approximate the generalization error to
1) provide a reliable and precise signal for the optimization procedure8and 2) select the
model to be returned in the end. Typically, the generalization error is assessed via the train-
validation-test protocol (Bishop, 1995; Raschka, 2018). This means that several models are
trained on a training set , the best one is selected via holdout (using a single split) or the
K-fold cross-validation, and the generalization error is then reported on the test set. The
AutoML system then returns a single model in case of holdout and a combination of K
models in case of K-fold cross-validation (Caruana et al., 2006). One could also use model
selection strategies aiming to reduce the eect of overtting to the validation set (Dwork
et al., 2015; Tsamardinos et al., 2018), but while such model selection strategies are an
important area of research, houldout or K-fold cross-validation remain the most prominent
choices (Henery, 1994; Kohavi and John, 1995; Hastie et al., 2001; Guyon et al., 2010; Bischl
et al., 2012; Raschka, 2018).
The inuence of the model selection strategy on the performance is well known (Kalousis
and Hilario, 2003), and researchers have studied their impact (Kohavi, 1995). However,
there is no single best strategy, since there is a tradeo between approximation quality and
time required to compute the validation loss.
Post-hoc Ensembling. AutoML systems evaluate dozens or hundreds of models during
their optimization procedure. Thus, it is a natural next step to not only use a single model
at the end but to ensemble multiple for improved performance and reduced overtting.
8. Dierent model selection strategies could be ignored from an optimization point of view, where the goal
is to optimize performance given a loss function, as is often done in the research elds of meta-learning
and hyperparameter optimization. However, for AutoML systems, this is highly relevant as we are not
interested in the optimization performance (of some subpart) of these systems, but the nal estimated
generalization performance when applied to new data.
31

--- PAGE 32 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
This was rst proposed to combine the solutions found by particle swarm optimiza-
tion (Escalante et al., 2010) and then by an evolutionary algorithm (B urger and Pauli,
2015). While these works used heuristic methods to combine multiple models into a nal
ensemble, it is also possible to treat this as another optimization problem (Feurer et al.,
2015a) and solve it with ensemble selection (Caruana et al., 2004) or stacking (LeDell and
Poirier, 2020).
Instead of using a single layer of machine learning models, Automatic Frankenstein-
ing (Wistuba et al., 2017) proposed two-layer stacking, applying AutoML to the outputs
of an AutoML system instead of a single layer of ML algorithms followed by an ensem-
bling mechanism. Auto-Stacker went one step further, directly optimizing for a two-layer
AutoML system (Chen et al., 2018).
6.4.2 AutoML systems
To the best of our knowledge, the rst AutoML system which tunes both hyperparameters
and chooses algorithms was an ensemble method (Caruana et al., 2004). This system
randomly produces 2 000 classiers from a wide range of ML algorithms and constructs
a post-hoc ensemble. It was later robustied (Caruana et al., 2006) and employed in a
winning submission to the KDD challenge (Niculescu-Mizil et al., 2009).
The rst AutoML system to jointly optimize the whole pipeline was Particle Swarm
Model Selection (Escalante et al., 2007, 2009). It used a xed-length representation of
the pipeline and contained feature selection, feature processing, classication and post-
processing implemented in the CLOP package9and was developed for the IJCNN 2007
agnostic learning vs. prior knowledge challenge (Guyon et al., 2007). It placed 2nd among
the solutions using the CLOP package provided by the organizers, only losing to a sub-
mission based on robust hyperparameter optimization and ensembling (Reunanen, 2007).
Later systems started employing model-based global optimization algorithms, such as Auto-
WEKA (Thornton et al., 2013; Kottho et al., 2019), which is built around the WEKA
software (Hall et al., 2009) and SMAC (Hutter et al., 2011) and uses cross-validation with
racing for model evaluation, and Hyperopt-sklearn (Komer et al., 2014), which was the rst
tool to use the now-popular scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) and paired it with the TPE
algorithm from the hyperopt package (Bergstra et al., 2011, 2013) and holdout.
We extended the approach of parametrizing a popular machine learning library and op-
timizing its hyperparameters with a black-box optimization algorithm using meta-learning
and post-hoc ensembles in Auto-sklearn (Feurer et al., 2015a, 2019). For classication, the
space of possible ML pipelines currently spans 16 classiers, 14 feature preprocessing meth-
ods and numerous data preprocessing methods, adding up to 122 hyperparameters for the
latest release. Auto-sklearn uses holdout as a default model selection strategy but allows
for other strategies such as cross-validation. Auto-sklearn was the dominating solution of
the rst AutoML challenge (Guyon et al., 2019).
The tree-based pipeline optimization tool (TPOT ; Olson et al., 2016b; Olson and Moore,
2019) uses grammatical evolution to construct ML pipelines of arbitrary length. Currently,
it uses scikit-leearn (Pedregosa et al., 2011) and XGBoost (Chen and Guestrin, 2016) for
its ML building blocks and 5-fold cross-validation to evaluate individual solutions. TPOT-
9.http://clopinet.com/CLOP/
32

--- PAGE 33 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
SH (Parmentier et al., 2019), inspired by our submission to the second AutoML challenge,
uses successive halving to speed up TPOT on large datasets.
There are also multiple AutoML systems that exploit stacking (Wolpert, 1992). First,
Automatic Frankensteining (Wistuba et al., 2017) introduces a two-stage optimization pro-
cess to build a two-layer stacking model. Second, AutoStacker directly optimizes a two-layer
stacking model with a genetic algorithm (Chen et al., 2018). Third, H2O AutoML package
builds on a manually designed set of defaults and random search and combines them in
a post-hoc stacking step, using building blocks from the H2O library (H2O.ai, 2020) and
XGBoost (Chen and Guestrin, 2016), and employing cross-validation. Lastly, AutoGluon
takes a radically dierent approach and completely drops hyperparameter optimization and
invests all available time into building a robust stacking model (Erickson et al., 2020).
Recently, there also have been works that aim to use dataset subsets to speed up the
evaluation (Parmentier et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2021).
Finally, there is also work on creating AutoML systems that can leverage recent ad-
vancements in deep learning, using either black-box optimization (Mendoza et al., 2016;
Zimmer et al., 2021) or neural architecture search (Jin et al., 2019).
Of course, there are also many techniques related to AutoML which are not used in one
of the AutoML systems discussed in this section, and we refer to Hutter et al. (2019) for
an overview of the eld of Automated Machine Learning, to Brazdil et al. (2008) for an
overview on meta-learning research which pre-dates the work on AutoML and to Escalante
(2021) for a discussion on the history of AutoML.
7. Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced our winning entry to the 2nd ChaLearn AutoML challenge,
PoSH Auto-sklearn , and automated its internal settings further, resulting in the next gen-
eration of our AutoML system: Auto-sklearn 2.0 . It provides a truly hands-free solution,
which, given a new task and resource limitations, automatically chooses the best setup.
Specically, we introduce three improvements for faster and more ecient AutoML: (i) to
get strong results quickly, we propose to use portfolios, which can be built oine and thus
reduce startup costs, (ii) to reduce time spent on poorly performing pipelines we propose
to add successive halving as a budget allocation strategy to the conguration space of our
AutoML system and (iii) to close the design space we opened up for AutoML we propose
to automatically select the best conguration of our system.
We conducted a large-scale study based on 208 meta-datasets for constructing our Au-
toML systems and 39 datasets for evaluating them and obtained substantially improved
performance compared to Auto-sklearn 1.0 , reducing the ADTM by up to a factor of 4 :5
and achieving a lower loss after 10 minutes than Auto-sklearn 1.0 after 60 minutes. Our
ablation study showed that using a model-based policy selector to choose the model selec-
tion strategy has the largest impact on performance and allows Auto-sklearn 2.0 to run
robustly on new, unseen datasets. Furthermore, we showed that our method is highly com-
petitive and outperforms other state-of-the-art AutoML systems in the OpenML AutoML
benchmark.
However, our system also introduces some shortcomings since it optimizes performance
towards a given optimization budget, performance metric and conguration space. Although
33

--- PAGE 34 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
all of these, along with the meta datasets, could be provided by a user to automatically
build a customized version of Auto-sklearn 2.0 , it would be interesting whether we can learn
how to transfer a specic AutoML system to dierent optimization budgets and metrics.
Although we have observed strong empirical performance using SH, we do not have any
performance guarantee when we combine SH with BO. Therefore, we deem developing
approaches that increase successive halving's lower budget over time promising next steps.
Also, there remain several hand-picked hyperparameters on the level of the AutoML system,
which we plan to automate in future work. These are, for example, automatically learning
the portfolio size, learning more hyper-hyperparameters of the dierent budget allocation
strategies (for instance, of SH) and proposing suitable conguration spaces given a dataset
and resources. Besides these, our use of two meta-features for the selector opens up the
research question of whether other meta-features could result in better performance. We
expect that we can tackle many of these problems by performing an additional optimization
loop on the training data. Finally, building the training data is currently quite expensive.
Even though this has to be done only once, it will be interesting to see whether we can
take shortcuts here, for example, by using a joint ranking model (Tornede et al., 2020) or
non-linear collaborative ltering (Fusi et al., 2018).
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge support by the state of Baden-W urttemberg through bwHPC
and the German Research Foundation (DFG) through grant no INST 39/963-1 FUGG.
This work has partly been supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under
the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant no.
716721. Robert Bosch GmbH is acknowledged for nancial support. We furthermore thank
all contributors to Auto-sklearn for their help in making it a useful AutoML tool and also
thank Francisco Rivera for providing a Singularity integration for the AutoML benchmark.
34

--- PAGE 35 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
A. Additional pseudo-code
We give pseudo-code for computing the estimated generalization error of Pacross all meta-
datasets DmetaforK-folds cross-validation in Algorithm 2 and successive halving in Algo-
rithm 3.
Algorithm 2: Estimating the generalization error of a portfolio with K-Fold Cross-
Validation
1:Input: Ordered set of ML pipelines P, datasets Dmeta, number of folds K,
2:L= 0
3:ford2(1;2;:::;jDmetaj)do
4:ld=1
5:forp2Pdo
6:l= 0
7: fork2(1;2;:::;K )do
8:l=l+GEV
(MD(train ;k)
train
;D(val;k)
train)
9: end for
10:l=l=K
11: ifl<ldthen
12:ld=l
13: end if
14: end for
15:L=L+ld
16:end for
17:returnL=jDmetaj
B. Additional results and experiments
In this section we will give additional results backing up our ndings. Concretely, we will
give further details on the reduced search space and provide further experimental evidence,
we will provide the main results from the main paper without post-hoc ensembles, and we
will give the raw numbers before averaging.
B.1 Early Stopping and Retrieving Intermittent Results
Estimating the generalization error of a pipeline Mpractically requires to restrict the
CPU-time per evaluation to prevent that one single, very long algorithm run stalls the
optimization procedure (Thornton et al., 2013; Feurer et al., 2015a). If an algorithm does
not return a result within the assigned time limit, it is terminated and the worst possible
generalization error is assigned. If the time limit is set too low, a majority of the algorithms
do not return a result and thus provide very scarce information for the optimization pro-
cedure. A too high time limit, however, might as well not return any meaningful results
since all time may be spent on long-running, under-performing pipelines. Additionally,
for iterative algorithms (e.g., gradient boosting and linear models trained with stochastic
35

--- PAGE 36 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
Algorithm 3: Estimating the generalization error of a portfolio with Successive
Halving
1:Input: Ordered set of ML pipelines P, datasets Dmeta, minimal budget bmin,
maximal budget bmax, downsampling rate 
2:L=1
3:R=bmax=bmin
4:smax=blog(R)c
5:B= (smax+ 1)R
6:n=dB
Rsmax
(smax+1)e
7:r=R smax
8:ford2(1;2;:::;jDmetaj)do
9:ld=1
10:Pd=P
11: while Truedo
12:P0=P:pop(r) # Pop top rmachine learning pipelines
13: l= [ ]
14: fori2(0;:::;smax)do
15:ni=bn ic
16:ri=ri
17: forp2P0do
18: l=GEV
(MDtrain
train
;Dval
train)
19: l=l[l
20: ifl<ldthen
21: ld=l
22: end if
23: end for
24:P0=top(P0;l;b(ni=eta)c), wheretop(P;l;k) returns the top kperforming
machine learning pipelines.
25: end for
26: ifjPdj== 0 then
27: break
28: end if
29: end while
30:L=L+ld
31:end for
32:returnL=jDmetaj
36

--- PAGE 37 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
10 STD 10 60 STD 60
(1) Auto-sklearn (1.0) 16:21 0:27 7:17 0:30
(2) Auto-sklearn (1.0) ISS 18:10 0:13 9:57 0:22
(3) Auto-sklearn (1.0) ISS + IRR 5:29 0:13 3:98 0:21
(4) Auto-sklearn (1.0) ISS + IRR + Port 3:70 0:143:08 0:13
Table 10: Comparison of Auto-sklearn 1.0 (1) with using only the iterative search space
(2), using the iterative search space and iterative results retrieval (3) and also
using a portfolio (4).
gradient descent), it is important to set the number of iterations such that the training
converges and does not overt, but most importantly nishes within this timelimit. Setting
this number too high (training exceeds time limit and/or overt) or too low (training has
not yet converged although there is time left) has detrimental eects to the nal perfor-
mance of the AutoML system. To mitigate this risk we implemented two measures for
iterative algorithms. Firstly, we use the early stopping mechanisms implemented by scikit-
learn. Specically, training stops if the loss on the training or validation set (depending on
the model and the conguration) increases or stalls, which prevents overtting (i.e. early
stopping). Secondly, we make use of intermittent results retrieval, e.g., saving the results
at checkpoints spaced at geometrically increasing iteration numbers, thereby ensuring that
every evaluation of an iterative algorithm returns a performance and thus yields information
for the optimizer. With this, our AutoML tool can robustly tackle large datasets without
the necessity to netune the number of iterations dependent on the time limit.
To study the eect of using the iterative results retrieval we compare standard Auto-
sklearn 1.0 with Auto-sklearn with the following changes applied one after the other: 1)
move to a conguration space which consists only of iterative algorithms 2) enable intermit-
tent results retrieval and 3) replace the KND by the portfolio. We give results in Table 10
and note that the KND uses meta-data gathered specically for use with the reduced con-
guration space. Only restricting the conguration space leads to decreased performance
which we attribute to the reduced hypothesis space. Intermittently writing results to disk
reduces the amount of failures, and using a portfolio instead of the KND results in the best
overall performance.
Once again, we also view the results through the eyes of a ranking plot in Figure 7.
These results demonstrate that the iterative search space combined with intermittent results
retrieval and a portfolio is especially dominating in the short term, and it takes a total of
50 minutes for Auto-sklearn 1.0 to catch up. We would like to note that the performance of
Auto-sklearn 2.0 is even better as can be seen in Table 5, but it would be interesting to see
how a portfolio of the full conguration space would perform, which we note as a further
research question.
37

--- PAGE 38 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
time [min]1.82.02.22.42.62.83.03.2average rankAuto-sklearn (1.0)
Auto-sklearn (1.0) ISS
Auto-sklearn (1.0) ISS + IRR
Auto-sklearn (1.0) ISS + IRR + Port
Figure 7: Ranking plot (lower is better) comparing Auto-sklearn 1.0 (1) with using only
the iterative search space (2), using the iterative search space and iterative results
retrieval (3) and also using a portfolio (4). Compared to Figure 6 we randomly
sample 500 combinations of the 10000 combinations of the 10 seeds of the 4
AutoML systems.
38

--- PAGE 39 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
10 minutes 60 minutes
BO KND Port BO KND Port
holdout 7:27 6:43 4:76 4:58 4:99 4:02
SH; holdout 6:61 6:70 5:76 4:70 4:63 3:97
3CV 9:58 8:95 7:88 7:10 7:12 5:98
SH; 3CV 8:88 8:97 7:20 6:81 6:47 6:01
5CV 10:48 15:24 13:77 7:34 7:47 5:66
SH; 5CV 11:70 13:29 8:06 7:05 6:69 5:93
10CV 23:20 27:4518:73 17:59 17:4716:17
SH; 10CV 23:98 27:7018:84 16:94 16:9816:07
Table 11: Results from Table 2 without post-hoc ensembles.
10MIN 60MIN
? std ? std
Auto-sklearn (2.0) 5:01 0:183:18 0:31
PoSH-Auto-sklearn 5 :76 0:12 3:97 0:22
Auto-sklearn (1.0) 23 :24 0:29 8:68 0:21
Table 12: Results from Table 5 without post-hoc ensembles.
B.2 Performance Without Post-Hoc Ensembling
We rst give numbers comparing only Bayesian optimization, k-nearest datasets (KND)
and a greedy portfolio. These results are similar to Table 2, but do not show the results of
post-hoc ensembling, but using the single best model. Overall, they are qualitatively very
similar, but it can be observed that the ensemble improves the average normalized balanced
error rate in every case.
Next, we compare Auto-sklearn 2.0 with PoSH Auto-sklearn and Auto-sklearn 1.0 , but
again only show the performance of the single best model and not of an ensemble as in
the main paper. Again, the ensemble result in uniform performance improvements with
Auto-sklearn 2.0 still leading in terms of performance.
B.3 Unaggregated results
To allow the readers to asses the performance of the individual methods on the individual
datasets we present the balanced error rates before normalizing and averaging them. We
give the raw results for portfolios from Table 2 in Tables 13 and 14. Additionally, we give
the raw results for Auto-sklearn 2.0 ,PoSH Auto-sklearn and Auto-sklearn 1.0 in Tables 15
and 16.
39

--- PAGE 40 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
Task ID Name holdout SH; holdout 3CV SH; 3CV 5CV SH; 5CV 10CV SH; 10CV
167104 Australian 0:1721 0 :1569 0:1622 0 :1617 0:1583 0 :1602 0:1556 0:1559
167184 blood-transfusion 0:3641 0:3610 0:3725 0 :3666 0:3689 0 :3722 0:3674 0 :3689
167168 vehicle 0:2211 0 :2267 0:2017 0 :2093 0:2172 0 :2052 0:2310 0:1870
167161 credit-g 0:2942 0:2841 0:2939 0 :2955 0:2942 0 :2911 0:2939 0 :2934
167185 cnae-9 0:0658 0 :0680 0:0651 0 :0616 0:0550 0:0629 0:0626 0 :0553
189905 car 0:0049 0 :0049 0:0097 0 :0029 0:0047 0 :0017 0:0023 0:0009
167152 mfeat-factors 0:0152 0 :0164 0:0141 0:0107 0:0150 0 :0117 0:0153 0 :0149
167181 kc1 0:2735 0 :2688 0:2720 0 :2713 0:2547 0 :2660 0:2477 0:2719
189906 segment 0:0666 0 :0687 0:0681 0:0620 0:0664 0 :0621 0:0643 0 :0671
189862 jasmine 0:2044 0 :2051 0:1982 0:1986 0:2010 0 :2027 0:2043 0 :2027
167149 kr-vs-kp 0:0067 0:0077 0:0093 0 :0085 0:0079 0 :0078 0:0071 0 :0080
189865 sylvine 0:0592 0 :0594 0:0600 0 :0608 0:0582 0 :0582 0:0560 0:0578
167190 phoneme 0:1231 0 :1245 0:1168 0 :1160 0:1152 0 :1136 0:1129 0:1144
189861 christine 0:2670 0 :2621 0:2608 0 :2556 0:2517 0:2567 0:2587 0 :2645
189872 fabert 0:3387 0 :3399 0:3140 0 :3120 0:3096 0:3204 0:3180 0 :3172
189871 dilbert 0:0241 0 :0248 0:0258 0 :0220 0:0191 0:0211 0:0303 0 :0647
168794 robert 0:5489 0:5861 0:5762 0 :5583 0:5854 0 :5873 0:6230 0 :6230
168797 riccardo 0:0035 0 :0052 0:0067 0 :0054 0:0027 0 :0027 0:5000 0 :5000
168796 guillermo 0:2186 0:2102 0:2311 0 :2228 0:2165 0 :2837 0:5000 0 :5000
75097 Amazon 0:2361 0:2431 0:2526 0 :2526 0:2379 0 :2385 0:2448 0 :2443
126026 nomao 0:0353 0 :0381 0:0360 0 :0345 0:0312 0:0331 0:0403 0 :0401
189909 jungle chess 0:1212 0 :1251 0:1232 0 :1156 0:1280 0 :1180 0:1134 0:1141
126029 bank-marketing 0:1397 0 :1436 0:1402 0 :1407 0:1352 0:1435 0:1378 0 :1362
126025 adult 0:1579 0 :1575 0:1553 0:1540 0:1591 0 :1562 0:1545 0 :1585
75105 KDDCup09 0:2450 0 :2495 0:2449 0:2512 0:2525 0 :2487 0:2497 0 :2456
168795 shuttle 0:0093 0 :0086 0:0085 0:0084 0:0085 0 :0087 0:0088 0 :0084
168793 volkert 0:3735 0 :3724 0:3939 0:3703 0:3720 0 :3775 0:3867 0 :3957
189874 helena 0:7483 0 :7624 0:7475 0:7478 0:7483 0 :7534 0:7476 0 :7575
167201 connect-4 0:2629 0 :2721 0:2653 0 :2630 0:2537 0:2565 0:3003 0 :2771
189908 Fashion-MNIST 0:1050 0:1098 0:1217 0 :1195 0:1181 0 :1153 0:1437 0 :1437
189860 APSFailure 0:0384 0 :0402 0:0355 0 :0364 0:0355 0:0354 0:0410 0 :0455
168792 jannis 0:3654 0 :3685 0:3648 0 :3655 0:3651 0:3567 0:3912 0 :3881
167083 numerai28.6 0:4776 0 :4765 0:4752 0 :4749 0:4747 0:4775 0:4789 0 :4788
167200 higgs 0:2736 0 :2764 0:2730 0 :2742 0:2724 0:2744 0:2832 0 :2844
168798 MiniBooNE 0:0581 0:0589 0:0691 0 :0633 0:0585 0 :0644 0:0691 0 :0685
189873 dionis 0:1172 0:1205 1:0000 1 :0000 1:0000 1 :0000 1:0000 1 :0000
189866 albert 0:3135 0:3171 0:3469 0 :3277 0:5000 0 :3354 0:3714 0 :3703
75127 airlines 0:3423 0 :3424 0:3450 0:3384 0:3419 0 :3429 0:3408 0 :3456
75193 covertype 0:0568 0 :0564 0:0683 0 :0600 0:0548 0:0556 0:2519 0 :2527
Table 13: Results from Table 2 for 10 minutes using portfolios. We boldface the lowest
error.
40

--- PAGE 41 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
Task ID Name holdout SH; holdout 3CV SH; 3CV 5CV SH; 5CV 10CV SH; 10CV
167104 Australian 0:1742 0 :1674 0:1623 0 :1626 0:1598 0 :1608 0:1625 0:1557
167184 blood-transfusion 0:3648 0:3618 0:3631 0 :3641 0:3689 0 :3692 0:3684 0 :3692
167168 vehicle 0:2125 0 :2344 0:1702 0 :1944 0:1657 0:1960 0:1959 0 :2151
167161 credit-g 0:2922 0:2895 0:3035 0 :2957 0:3056 0 :2978 0:3008 0 :2931
167185 cnae-9 0:0733 0 :0761 0:0560 0 :0616 0:0537 0 :0536 0:0675 0:0518
189905 car 0:0036 0 :0013 0:0037 0 :0098 0:0007 0:0012 0:0008 0 :0010
167152 mfeat-factors 0:0169 0 :0186 0:0130 0:0117 0:0139 0 :0132 0:0151 0 :0122
167181 kc1 0:2728 0 :2739 0:2680 0 :2724 0:2678 0 :2804 0:2546 0:2576
189906 segment 0:0708 0 :0692 0:0647 0 :0635 0:0588 0:0596 0:0621 0 :0613
189862 jasmine 0:2048 0 :2049 0:1995 0 :1989 0:1995 0:1976 0:1995 0 :1980
167149 kr-vs-kp 0:0060 0 :0080 0:0081 0 :0068 0:0064 0 :0068 0:0055 0:0053
189865 sylvine 0:0590 0 :0591 0:0584 0 :0587 0:0577 0 :0578 0:0573 0:0573
167190 phoneme 0:1222 0 :1237 0:1152 0 :1155 0:1111 0 :1130 0:1117 0:1105
189861 christine 0:2673 0 :2666 0:2575 0 :2584 0:2532 0:2575 0:2549 0 :2588
189872 fabert 0:3381 0 :3319 0:3099 0 :3097 0:3119 0 :3080 0:3027 0:3071
189871 dilbert 0:0200 0 :0200 0:0132 0:0146 0:0185 0 :0209 0:0212 0 :0149
168794 robert 0:5273 0 :5199 0:5238 0:5183 0:5456 0 :5605 0:5652 0 :5407
168797 riccardo 0:0029 0:0016 0:0018 0 :0019 0:0025 0 :0076 0:5000 0 :5000
168796 guillermo 0:2012 0:2025 0:2057 0 :2081 0:2100 0 :2039 0:5000 0 :5000
75097 Amazon 0:2376 0 :2394 0:2338 0 :2381 0:2431 0 :2384 0:2312 0:2324
126026 nomao 0:0352 0 :0353 0:0334 0 :0331 0:0320 0 :0327 0:0313 0:0319
189909 jungle chess 0:1214 0 :1221 0:1154 0 :1172 0:1171 0 :1153 0:1108 0:1141
126029 bank-marketing 0:1388 0 :1398 0:1380 0 :1392 0:1382 0 :1382 0:1370 0:1380
126025 adult 0:1546 0 :1541 0:1550 0 :1540 0:1550 0 :1550 0:1539 0:1538
75105 KDDCup09 0:2492 0:2461 0:2477 0 :2532 0:2466 0 :2488 0:2617 0 :2485
168795 shuttle 0:0136 0 :0107 0:0125 0 :0093 0:0084 0:0063 0:0127 0 :0087
168793 volkert 0:3600 0 :3673 0:3449 0:3551 0:3496 0 :3487 0:3581 0 :3563
189874 helena 0:7449 0 :7494 0:7331 0:7369 0:7407 0 :7404 0:7562 0 :7452
167201 connect-4 0:2539 0 :2556 0:2382 0 :2428 0:2370 0 :2373 0:2416 0:2369
189908 Fashion-MNIST 0:1010 0:0971 0:1046 0 :1066 0:1102 0 :1105 0:1191 0 :1075
189860 APSFailure 0:0362 0 :0374 0:0345 0 :0364 0:0372 0 :0347 0:0343 0:0334
168792 jannis 0:3670 0 :3638 0:3589 0 :3576 0:3584 0 :3565 0:3473 0:3572
167083 numerai28.6 0:4765 0 :4763 0:4774 0 :4770 0:4750 0 :4767 0:4755 0:4743
167200 higgs 0:2712 0 :2734 0:2718 0:2680 0:2696 0 :2680 0:2701 0 :2683
168798 MiniBooNE 0:0576 0 :0583 0:0560 0:0536 0:0571 0 :0565 0:0560 0 :0608
189873 dionis 0:0961 0:1068 1:0000 1 :0000 1:0000 1 :0000 1:0000 1 :0000
189866 albert 0:3116 0 :3168 0:3170 0 :3172 0:3094 0:3199 0:3183 0 :3186
75127 airlines 0:3403 0 :3410 0:3375 0:3401 0:3388 0 :3390 0:3398 0 :3399
75193 covertype 0:0537 0 :0519 0:0496 0 :0496 0:0454 0:0461 0:0458 0 :0459
Table 14: Results from Table 2 for 60 minutes using portfolios. We boldface the lowest
error.
41

--- PAGE 42 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
Task ID Name Auto-sklearn (2.0) PoSH-Auto-sklearn Auto-sklearn (1.0)
167104 Australian 0:1617 0:1569 0:1628
167184 blood-transfusion 0:3694 0 :3610 0:3534
167168 vehicle 0:2030 0 :2267 0:1654
167161 credit-g 0:2903 0:2841 0:2951
167185 cnae-9 0:0635 0:0680 0 :0674
189905 car 0:0015 0:0049 0 :0057
167152 mfeat-factors 0:0123 0:0164 0 :0185
167181 kc1 0:2707 0 :2688 0:2301
189906 segment 0:0646 0 :0687 0:0624
189862 jasmine 0:2020 0 :2051 0:1989
167149 kr-vs-kp 0:0086 0:0077 0:0089
189865 sylvine 0:0597 0 :0594 0:0583
167190 phoneme 0:1158 0:1245 0 :1257
189861 christine 0:2562 0:2621 0 :2666
189872 fabert 0:3250 0:3399 0 :3323
189871 dilbert 0:0240 0 :0248 0:0066
168794 robert 0:5861 0 :5861 0:6545
168797 riccardo 0:0052 0 :0052 0:5000
168796 guillermo 0:2102 0 :2102 0:5000
75097 Amazon 0:2435 0:2431 0:2610
126026 nomao 0:0336 0:0381 0 :0383
189909 jungle chess 0:1205 0:1251 0 :1231
126029 bank-marketing 0:1402 0:1436 0 :1412
126025 adult 0:1547 0:1575 0 :1608
75105 KDDCup09 0:2460 0:2495 0 :2863
168795 shuttle 0:0084 0:0086 0 :0111
168793 volkert 0:3717 0:3724 0 :4233
189874 helena 0:7493 0:7624 0 :9157
167201 connect-4 0:2642 0:2721 0 :2809
189908 Fashion-MNIST 0:1070 0:1098 0 :1383
189860 APSFailure 0:0372 0 :0402 0:0370
168792 jannis 0:3654 0 :3685 0:3637
167083 numerai28.6 0:4753 0:4765 0 :4774
167200 higgs 0:2746 0:2764 0 :2777
168798 MiniBooNE 0:0603 0:0589 0:0622
189873 dionis 0:1205 0 :1205 0:6731
189866 albert 0:3171 0 :3171 0:4407
75127 airlines 0:3404 0:3424 0 :3536
75193 covertype 0:0564 0 :0564 0:8571
Table 15: Results from Table 5 for 10 minutes. We boldface the lowest error.
42

--- PAGE 43 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
Task ID Name Auto-sklearn (2.0) PoSH-Auto-sklearn Auto-sklearn (1.0)
167104 Australian 0:1562 0:1674 0 :1658
167184 blood-transfusion 0:3669 0 :3618 0:3572
167168 vehicle 0:2187 0 :2344 0:1822
167161 credit-g 0:2980 0:2895 0:3004
167185 cnae-9 0:0566 0:0761 0 :0620
189905 car 0:0038 0:0013 0:0043
167152 mfeat-factors 0:0126 0:0186 0 :0136
167181 kc1 0:2600 0 :2739 0:2250
189906 segment 0:0609 0:0692 0 :0697
189862 jasmine 0:1971 0:2049 0 :1985
167149 kr-vs-kp 0:0060 0:0080 0 :0085
189865 sylvine 0:0572 0 :0591 0:0555
167190 phoneme 0:1140 0:1237 0 :1235
189861 christine 0:2592 0:2666 0 :2619
189872 fabert 0:3120 0:3319 0 :3185
189871 dilbert 0:0163 0 :0200 0:0090
168794 robert 0:5199 0 :5199 0:5327
168797 riccardo 0:0016 0 :0016 0:0016
168796 guillermo 0:2025 0 :2025 0:1964
75097 Amazon 0:2371 0:2394 0 :2481
126026 nomao 0:0323 0:0353 0 :0361
189909 jungle chess 0:1145 0 :1221 0:1136
126029 bank-marketing 0:1387 0:1398 0 :1428
126025 adult 0:1544 0:1541 0:1574
75105 KDDCup09 0:2504 0:2461 0:2549
168795 shuttle 0:0093 0:0107 0 :0109
168793 volkert 0:3563 0 :3673 0:3440
189874 helena 0:7399 0:7494 0 :7693
167201 connect-4 0:2408 0:2556 0 :2709
189908 Fashion-MNIST 0:1023 0:0971 0:0984
189860 APSFailure 0:0343 0:0374 0 :0375
168792 jannis 0:3591 0:3638 0 :3641
167083 numerai28.6 0:4759 0:4763 0 :4760
167200 higgs 0:2690 0:2734 0 :2738
168798 MiniBooNE 0:0561 0:0583 0 :0620
189873 dionis 0:1068 0 :1068 0:6731
189866 albert 0:3168 0 :3168 0:3143
75127 airlines 0:3394 0:3410 0 :3449
75193 covertype 0:0519 0 :0519 0:8571
Table 16: Results from Table 5 for 60 minutes. We boldface the lowest error.
43

--- PAGE 44 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
C. Theoretical properties of the greedy algorithm
C.1 Denitions
Denition 1 (Discrete derivative, from Krause and Golovin, 2014) For a set function
f: 2V!R;SV ande2V letf(ejS) =f(S[feg) f(S)be the discrete derivative of
fatSwith respect to e.
Denition 2 (Submodularity, from Krause and Golovin, 2014): A function f: 2V!Ris
submodular if for everyABV ande2VnB it holds that f(ejA)f(ejB).
Denition 3 (Monotonicity, from Krause and Golovin, 2014): A function f: 2V!Ris
monotone if for everyABV;f(A)f(B).
C.2 Choosing on the test set
In this section we give a proof of Proposition 1 from the main paper:
Proposition 2 Minimizing the test loss of a portfolio Pon a set of datasets D1;:::;DjDmetaj,
when choosing a ML pipeline from PforDdbased on performance on Dd;test, is equivalent
to the sensor placement problem for minimizing detection time (Krause et al., 2008).
Following Krause et al. (Krause et al., 2008), sensor set placement aims at maximizing
a so-called penalty reduction R(A) =P
i2IP(i)R(A;i), whereIare intrusion scenarios
following a probability distribution Pwithibeing a specic intrusion. AC is asensor
placement , a subset of all possible locations Cwhere sensors are actually placed. Penalty
reductionRis dened as the reduction of the penalty when choosing Acompared to the
maximum penalty possible on scenario i:R(A;i) = penaltyi(1) penaltyi(T(A;i)). In
the simplest case where action is taken upon intrusion detection, the penalty is equal to the
detection time (penaltyi(t) =t). The detection time of a sensor placement T(A;i) is simply
dened as the minimum of the detection times of its individual members: min s2AT(s;i).
In our setting, we need to do the following replacements to nd that the problems are
equivalent:
1. Intrusion scenarios I: datasetsfD1;:::;DjDmetajg,
2. Possible sensor locations C: set of candidate ML pipelines of our algorithm C, De-
tection time T(s2A;i) on intrusion scenario i: test performance L(MC;Dd;test) on
datasetDd,
3. Detection time of a sensor placement T(A;i): test loss of applying portfolio Pon
datasetDd: minp2PL(p;Dd;test)
4. Penalty function penaltyi(t): loss functionL, in our case, the penalty is equal to the
loss.
5. Penalty reduction for an intrusion scenario R(A;i): the penalty reduction for success-
fully applying a portfolio Pto datasetd:R(P;d) = penaltyd(1) minp2PL(p;Dd;test).10

10. This would be the general case for a metric with no upper bound. In case of metrics such as the
misclassication error, the maximal penalty would be 1.
44

--- PAGE 45 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
C.3 Choosing on the validation set
We demonstrate that choosing an ML pipeline from the portfolio via holdout (i.e. a val-
idation set) and reporting its test performance is neither submodular nor monotone by a
simple example. To simplify notation we argue in terms of performance instead of penalty
reduction, which is equivalent.
LetB=f(5;5);(7;7);(10;10)gandA=f(5;5);(7;7)g, where each tuple represents
the validation and test performance. For e= (8;6) we obtain the discrete derivatives
f(ejA) = 1 and f(ejB) = 0 which violates Denition 2. The fact that the discrete
derivative is negative violates Denition 3 because f(A)>f(A[feg).
C.4 Successive Halving
As in the previous subsection, we use a simple example to demonstrate that selecting an
algorithm via the successive halving model selection strategy is neither submodular nor
monotone. To simplify notation we argue in terms of performance instead of penalty re-
duction, which is equivalent.
LetB=f((5;5);(8;8));((5;5);(6;6));((4;4);(5;5))gandA=f((5;5);(7;7))g, where
each tuple is a learning curve of validation-, test performance tuples. For e= ((6;5);(6;5)),
we eliminate entries 2 and 3 from Bin the rst iteration of successive halving (while we
advance entries 1 and 4), and we eliminate entry 1 from A. After the second stage, the
performances are f(B) = 8 andf(A) = 5, and the discrete derivatives  f(ejA) = 1 and
f(ejB) = 0 which violates Denition 2. The fact that the discrete derivative is negative
violates Denition 3 because f(A)>f(A[feg).
C.5 Further equalities
In addition, our problem can also be phrased as a facility location problem (Krarup and
Pruzan, 1983) and statements about the facility location problem can be applied to our
problem setup as well.
D. Implementation Details
D.1 Software
We implemented the AutoML systems and experiments in the Python3 programming lan-
guage, using numpy (Harris et al., 2020), scipy (Virtanen et al., 2020), scikit-learn (Pe-
dregosa et al., 2011), pandas (Wes McKinney, 2010; Reback et al., 2021), and matplotlib (Hunter,
2007). We used version 0.12.6 of the Auto-sklearn Python package for the experiments and
added Auto-sklearn 2.0 functionality in version 0.12.7 which we then used for the AutoML
benchmark. We give the exact version numbers used for the AutoML benchmark in Ta-
ble 17.
D.2 Conguration Space
We give the conguration space we use in Auto-sklearn 2.0 in Table 18.
45

--- PAGE 46 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
Package Version
Auto-sklearn 2.0 0.12.7
Auto-sklearn 1.0 0.12.6
Auto-WEKA 2.6.3
TPOT 0.11.7
H2O AutoML 3.32.1.4
Tuned Random Forest 0.24.2
AutoML benchmark 973de79617e68a881dcc640842ea1d21dfd4b36c
Table 17: Package versions used for the AutoML benchmark.
D.3 Successive Halving hyperparameters
We used the same hyperparameters for all experiments. First, we set to eta= 4. Next, we
had to choose the minimal and maximal budgets assigned to each algorithm. For the tree-
based methods we chose to go from 32 to 512, while for the linear models (SGD and passive
aggressive) we chose 64 as the minimal budget and 1024 as the maximal budget. Further
tuning these hyperparameters would be an interesting, but an expensive way forward.
E. Datasets
We give the name, OpenML task ID and the size of all datasets we used in Table 19 and 20.
46

--- PAGE 47 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
Name Domain Default Log
Classier (Extra Trees, Gradient Boosting, MLP, Random Forest -
Passive Aggressive, Random Forest, SGD)
Extra Trees: Bootstrap (True, False) False -
Extra Trees: Criterion (gini, entropy) gini -
Extra Trees: Max Features [0 :0;1:0] 0.5 No
Extra Trees: Min Samples Leaf [1 ;20] 1 No
Extra Trees: Min Samples Split [2 ;20] 2 No
Gradient Boosting: Early Stopping (o, valid, train) o -
Gradient Boosting: L2 Regularization [1 e 10;1:0] 0.0 Yes
Gradient Boosting: Learning Rate [0 :01;1:0] 0.1 Yes
Gradient Boosting: Max Leaf Nodes [3 ;2047] 31 Yes
Gradient Boosting: Min Samples Leaf [1 ;200] 20 Yes
Gradient Boosting: N Iter No Change [1 ;20] 10 No
Gradient Boosting: Validation Fraction [0 :01;0:4] 0.1 No
MLP: Activation (tanh, relu) relu -
MLP: Alpha [1 e 07;0:1] 0.0001 Yes
MLP: Early Stopping (valid, train) valid -
MLP: Hidden Layer Depth [1 ;3] 1 No
MLP: Learning Rate Init [0 :0001;0:5] 0.001 Yes
MLP: Num Nodes Per Layer [16 ;264] 32 Yes
Passive Aggressive: C [1 e 05;10:0] 1.0 Yes
Passive Aggressive: Average (False, True) False -
Passive Aggressive: Loss (hinge, squared hinge) hinge -
Passive Aggressive: Tol [1 e 05;0:1] 0.0001 Yes
Random Forest: Bootstrap (True, False) True -
Random Forest: Criterion (gini, entropy) gini -
Random Forest: Max Features [0 :0;1:0] 0.5 No
Random Forest: Min Samples Leaf [1 ;20] 1 No
Random Forest: Min Samples Split [2 ;20] 2 No
Sgd: Alpha [1 e 07;0:1] 0.0001 Yes
Sgd: Average (False, True) False -
Sgd: Epsilon [1 e 05;0:1] 0.0001 Yes
Sgd: Eta0 [1 e 07;0:1] 0.01 Yes
Sgd: L1 Ratio [1 e 09;1:0] 0.15 Yes
Sgd: Learning Rate (optimal, invscaling, constant) invscaling -
Sgd: Loss (hinge, log, modied Huber, log -
squared hinge, perceptron)
Sgd: Penalty (l1, l2, elasticnet) l2 -
Sgd: Power T [1 e 05;1:0] 0.5 No
Sgd: Tol [1 e 05;0:1] 0.0001 Yes
Balancing: Strategy (none, weighting) none -
Categorical Encoding: Choice (no encoding, one hot encoding) one hot encoding -
Category Coalescence: Choice (minority coalescer, no coalescense) minority coalescer -
Category Coalescence: Minimum Fraction [0 :0001;0:5] 0.01 Yes
Imputation of missing values (mean, median, most frequent) mean -
Rescaling: Choice (Min/Max, none, normalize, Power, standardize -
Quantile, Robust, standardize)
Quantile Transformer: N Quantiles [10 ;2000] 1000 No
Quantile Transformer: Output Distribution (uniform, normal) uniform -
Robust Scaler: Q Max [0 :7;0:999] 0.75 No
Robust Scaler: Q Min [0 :001;0:3] 0.25 No
Table 18: Conguration space for Auto-sklearn 2.0 using only iterative models and only
preprocessing to transform data into a format that can be usefully employed by
the dierent classication algorithms. The nal column (log) states whether we
actually search log10().
47

--- PAGE 48 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
name tid #obs #feat #cls
OVA O. . . 75126 1545 10937 2
OVA C. . . 75125 1545 10937 2
OVA P. . . 75121 1545 10937 2
OVA E. . . 75120 1545 10937 2
OVA K. . . 75116 1545 10937 2
OVA L. . . 75115 1545 10937 2
OVA B. . . 75114 1545 10937 2
UMIST. . . 189859 575 10305 20
amazo. . . 189878 1500 10001 50
eatin. . . 189786 945 6374 7
CIFAR. . . 167204 60000 3073 10
GTSRB. . . 190156 51839 2917 43
Biore. . . 75156 3751 1777 2
hiva . . . 166996 4229 1618 2
GTSRB. . . 190157 51839 1569 43
GTSRB. . . 190158 51839 1569 43
Inter. . . 168791 3279 1559 2
micro. . . 146597 571 1301 20
Devna. . . 167203 92000 1025 46
GAMET. . . 167085 1600 1001 2
Kuzus. . . 190154 270912 785 49
mnist. . . 75098 70000 785 10
Kuzus. . . 190159 70000 785 10
isole. . . 75169 7797 618 26
har 126030 10299 562 6
madel. . . 146594 2600 501 2
KDD98. . . 211723 82318 478 2
phili. . . 189864 5832 309 2
madel. . . 189863 3140 260 2
USPS 189858 9298 257 10
semei. . . 75236 1593 257 10
GTSRB. . . 190155 51839 257 43
India. . . 211720 9144 221 8
dna 167202 3186 181 3
musk 75108 6598 170 2
Speed. . . 146679 8378 123 2
hill-. . . 146592 1212 101 2
fric. . . 166866 500 101 2
MiceP. . . 167205 1080 82 8
meta . . . 2356 45164 75 11
ozone. . . 75225 2534 73 2
analc. . . 146576 841 71 4
kddi. . . 166970 10108 69 2
optdi. . . 258 5620 65 10
one-h. . . 75154 1600 65 100
synth. . . 146574 600 62 6
splic. . . 275 3190 61 3
spamb. . . 273 4601 58 2
rst. . . 75221 6118 52 6
fric. . . 75180 1000 51 2
fric. . . 166944 500 51 2
fric. . . 166951 500 51 2
Diabe. . . 189828 101766 50 3
oils. . . 3049 937 50 2
pol 75139 15000 49 2
tokyo. . . 167100 959 45 2
qsar-. . . 75232 1055 42 2
textu. . . 126031 5500 41 11
autoU. . . 189899 750 41 8
ailer. . . 75146 13750 41 2
wavef. . . 288 5000 41 3
cylin. . . 146600 540 40 2
water. . . 166953 527 39 2
annea. . . 232 898 39 5
mc1 75133 9466 39 2
pc4 75092 1458 38 2
pc3 75129 1563 38 2
porto. . . 211722 595212 38 2
pc2 75100 5589 37 2name tid # obs # feat # class
satim. . . 2120 6430 37 6
Satel. . . 189844 5100 37 2
soybe. . . 271 683 36 19
cardi. . . 75217 2126 36 10
cjs 146601 2796 35 6
colle. . . 75212 1302 35 2
puma3. . . 75153 8192 33 2
Gestu. . . 75109 9873 33 5
kick 189870 72983 33 2
bank3. . . 75179 8192 33 2
wdbc 146596 569 31 2
Phish. . . 75215 11055 31 2
fars 189840 100968 30 8
hypot. . . 3044 3772 30 4
steel. . . 168785 1941 28 7
eyem. . . 189779 10936 28 3
fric. . . 75136 1000 26 2
fric. . . 75199 1000 26 2
wall-. . . 75235 5456 25 4
led24. . . 189841 3200 25 10
colli. . . 189845 1000 24 30
rl 189869 31406 23 2
mushr. . . 254 8124 23 2
meta 166875 528 22 2
jm1 75093 10885 22 2
pc1 75159 1109 22 2
kc2 146583 522 22 2
cpua. . . 75233 8192 22 2
autoU. . . 75089 1000 21 2
GAMET. . . 167086 1600 21 2
GAMET. . . 167087 1600 21 2
bosto. . . 166905 506 21 2
GAMET. . . 167088 1600 21 2
GAMET. . . 167089 1600 21 2
churn. . . 167097 5000 21 2
clima. . . 167106 540 21 2
micro. . . 189875 20000 21 5
GAMET. . . 167090 1600 21 2
Tra. . . 211724 70340 21 3
ringn. . . 75234 7400 21 2
twono. . . 75187 7400 21 2
eucal. . . 2125 736 20 5
eleva. . . 75184 16599 19 2
pbcse. . . 166897 1945 19 2
baseb. . . 2123 1340 18 3
house. . . 75174 22784 17 2
colle. . . 75196 1161 17 2
BachC. . . 189829 5665 17 102
pendi. . . 262 10992 17 10
lette. . . 236 20000 17 26
spoke. . . 75178 263256 15 10
eeg-e. . . 75219 14980 15 2
wind 75185 6574 15 2
Japan. . . 126021 9961 15 9
compa. . . 211721 5278 14 2
vowel. . . 3047 990 13 11
cpus. . . 75147 8192 13 2
autoU. . . 189900 700 13 3
autoU. . . 75118 1100 13 5
dress. . . 146602 500 13 2
senso. . . 166906 576 12 2
wine-. . . 189836 4898 12 7
wine-. . . 189843 1599 12 6
Magic. . . 75112 19020 12 2
mv 75195 40768 11 2
parit. . . 167101 1124 11 2
mofn-. . . 167094 1324 11 2
fric. . . 75149 1000 11 2
poker. . . 340 829201 11 10name tid #obs #feat #cls
fric. . . 166950 500 11 2
page-. . . 260 5473 11 5
ilpd 146593 583 11 2
2dpla. . . 75142 40768 11 2
fried. . . 75161 40768 11 2
rmfts. . . 166859 508 11 2
stock. . . 166915 950 10 2
tic-t. . . 279 958 10 2
breas. . . 245 699 10 2
xd6 167096 973 10 2
cmc 253 1473 10 3
profb. . . 146578 672 10 2
diabe. . . 267 768 9 2
abalo. . . 2121 4177 9 28
bank8. . . 75141 8192 9 2
elect. . . 336 45312 9 2
kdde. . . 166913 782 9 2
house. . . 75176 20640 9 2
nurse. . . 256 12960 9 5
kin8n. . . 75166 8192 9 2
yeast. . . 2119 1484 9 10
puma8. . . 75171 8192 9 2
analc. . . 75143 4052 8 2
ldpa 75134 164860 8 11
pm10 166872 500 8 2
no2 166932 500 8 2
LED-d. . . 146603 500 8 10
artif. . . 126028 10218 8 10
monks. . . 3055 554 7 2
space. . . 75148 3107 7 2
kr-vs. . . 75223 28056 7 18
monks. . . 3054 601 7 2
Run o. . . 167103 88588 7 2
delta. . . 75173 9517 7 2
strik. . . 166882 625 7 2
mammo. . . 3048 11183 7 2
monks. . . 3053 556 7 2
kropt. . . 2122 28056 7 18
delta. . . 75163 7129 6 2
wilt 167105 4839 6 2
fric. . . 75131 1000 6 2
mozil. . . 126024 15545 6 2
polle. . . 75192 3848 6 2
socmo. . . 75213 1156 6 2
irish. . . 146575 500 6 2
fric. . . 166931 500 6 2
arsen. . . 166957 559 5 2
arsen. . . 166956 559 5 2
walki. . . 75250 149332 5 22
analc. . . 146577 797 5 6
bankn. . . 146586 1372 5 2
arsen. . . 166959 559 5 2
visua. . . 75210 8641 5 2
balan. . . 241 625 5 3
arsen. . . 166958 559 5 2
volca. . . 189902 10130 4 5
skin-. . . 75237 245057 4 2
tamil. . . 189846 45781 4 20
quake. . . 75157 2178 4 2
volca. . . 189893 8654 4 5
volca. . . 189890 8753 4 5
volca. . . 189887 9989 4 5
volca. . . 189884 10668 4 5
volca. . . 189883 10176 4 5
volca. . . 189882 1515 4 5
volca. . . 189881 1521 4 5
volca. . . 189880 1623 4 5
Titan. . . 167099 2201 4 2
volca. . . 189894 1183 4 5
Table 19: Characteristics of the 208 datasets in Dmeta (rst part) sorted by number of
features. We report for each dataset the name and the task id (as a link) as
used on OpenML.org, and furthermore the number of observations, the number
of features and the number of classes.
48

--- PAGE 49 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
name tid #obs #feat #cls
rober. . . 168794 10000 7201 10
ricca. . . 168797 20000 4297 2
guill. . . 168796 20000 4297 2
dilbe. . . 189871 10000 2001 5
chris. . . 189861 5418 1637 2
cnae-. . . 167185 1080 857 9
faber. . . 189872 8237 801 7
Fashi. . . 189908 70000 785 10
KDDCu. . . 75105 50000 231 2
mfeat. . . 167152 2000 217 10
volke. . . 168793 58310 181 10
APSFa. . . 189860 76000 171 2
jasmi. . . 189862 2984 145 2
nomao. . . 126026 34465 119 2
alber. . . 189866 425240 79 2
dioni. . . 189873 416188 61 355
janni. . . 168792 83733 55 4
cover. . . 75193 581012 55 7
MiniB. . . 168798 130064 51 2
conne. . . 167201 67557 43 3name tid #obs #feat #cls
kr-vs. . . 167149 3196 37 2
higgs. . . 167200 98050 29 2
helen. . . 189874 65196 28 100
kc1 167181 2109 22 2
numer. . . 167083 96320 22 2
credi. . . 167161 1000 21 2
sylvi. . . 189865 5124 21 2
segme. . . 189906 2310 20 7
vehic. . . 167168 846 19 4
bank-. . . 126029 45211 17 2
Austr. . . 167104 690 15 2
adult. . . 126025 48842 15 2
Amazo. . . 75097 32769 10 2
shutt. . . 168795 58000 10 7
airli. . . 75127 539383 8 2
car 189905 1728 7 4
jungl. . . 189909 44819 7 3
phone. . . 167190 5404 6 2
blood. . . 167184 748 5 2
Table 20: Characteristics of the 39 datasets in Dtestsorted by number of features. We report
for each dataset the name and the task id (as a link) as used on OpenML.org, and
furthermore the number of observations, the number of features and the number
of classes.
49

--- PAGE 50 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
References
A. Alaa and M. van der Schaar. AutoPrognosis: Automated clinical prognostic modeling
via Bayesian optimization with structured kernel learning. In J. Dy and A. Krause, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML'18) ,
volume 80, pages 139{148. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2018.
M.-F. Balcan, T. Sandholm, and E. Vitercik. Generalization in portfolio-based algorithm
selection. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Articial Intelligence (AAAI'21) ,
volume 35, pages 12225{12232, 2021.
R. Bardenet, M. Brendel, B. K egl, and M. Sebag. Collaborative hyperparameter tuning. In
S. Dasgupta and D. McAllester, editors, Proceedings of the 30th International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML'13) , pages 199{207. Omnipress, 2013.
Y. Bengio and Y. Grandvalet. No unbiased estimator of the variance of k-fold cross-
validation. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 4:1089{1105, 2004.
J. Bergstra, R. Bardenet, Y. Bengio, and B. K egl. Algorithms for hyper-parameter op-
timization. In J. Shawe-Taylor, R. Zemel, P. Bartlett, F. Pereira, and K. Weinberger,
editors, Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems (NeurIPS'11) , pages 2546{2554. Curran Associates, 2011.
J. Bergstra, D. Yamins, and D. Cox. Making a science of model search: Hyperparameter
Optimization in hundreds of dimensions for vision architectures. In S. Dasgupta and
D. McAllester, editors, Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML'13) , pages 115{123. Omnipress, 2013.
A. Biedenkapp, H. F. Bozkurt, T. Eimer, F. Hutter, and M. Lindauer. Dynamic algorithm
conguration: Foundation of a new meta-algorithmic framework. In J. Lang, G. De
Giacomo, B. Dilkina, and M. Milano, editors, Proceedings of the Twenty-fourth European
Conference on Articial Intelligence (ECAI'20) , pages 427{434, June 2020.
M. Birattari, T. St utzle, L. Paquete, and K. Varrentrapp. A racing algorithm for conguring
metaheuristics. In W. Langdon, E. Cantu-Paz, K. Mathias, R. Roy, D. Davis, R. Poli,
K. Balakrishnan, V. Honavar, G. Rudolph, J. Wegener, L. Bull, M. Potter, A. Schultz,
J. Miller, E. Burke, and N. Jonoska, editors, Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolution-
ary Computation Conference (GECCO'02) , pages 11{18. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers,
2002.
B. Bischl, O. Mersmann, H. Trautmann, and C. Weihs. Resampling methods for meta-model
validation with recommendations for evolutionary computation. Evolutionary Computa-
tion, 20(2):249{275, 2012.
B. Bischl, G. Casalicchio, M. Feurer, F. Hutter, M. Lang, R. Mantovani, J. van Rijn,
and J. Vanschoren. OpenML benchmarking suites. In J. Vanschoren, S. Yeung, and
M. Xenochristou, editors, Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems
Track on Datasets and Benchmarks , 2021.
50

--- PAGE 51 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
C. M. Bishop. Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition . Oxford University Press, Inc.,
1995.
P. Brazdil and C. Soares. A comparison of ranking methods for classication algorithm
selection. In R. Lopez de Mantaras and E. Plaza, editors, Machine Learning: ECML
2000, volume 1810 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 63{74. Springer, 2000.
P. Brazdil, J. Gama, and B. Henery. Characterizing the applicability of classication al-
gorithms using meta-level learning. In F. Bergadano and L. De Raedt, editors, Machine
Learning: ECML-94 , pages 83{102. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1994.
P. Brazdil, C. Soares, and R. Pereira. Reducing rankings of classiers by eliminating redun-
dant classiers. In P. Brazdil and A. Jorge, editors, Progress in Articial Intelligence:
Knowledge Extraction, Multi-agent Systems, Logic Programming, and Constraint Solving ,
Lecture Notes in Articial Intelligence, pages 14{21. Springer, 2001.
P. Brazdil, C. Giraud-Carrier, C. Soares, and R. Vilalta. Metalearning: Applications to
Data Mining . Springer, 1 edition, 2008.
L. Breimann. Random forests. Machine Learning Journal , 45:5{32, 2001.
F. B urger and J. Pauli. A holistic classication optimization framework with feature se-
lection, preprocessing, manifold learning and classiers. In A. Fred, M. De Marsico, and
M. Figueiredo, editors, Procceedings of 4th International Conference on Pattern Recog-
nition: Applications and Methods (ICPRAM'15) , volume 9493 of Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science , pages 52{68. Springer, 2015.
R. Caruana, A. Niculescu-Mizil, G. Crew, and A. Ksikes. Ensemble selection from libraries
of models. In R. Greiner, editor, Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML'04) . Omnipress, 2004.
R. Caruana, A. Munson, and A. Niculescu-Mizil. Getting the most out of ensemble selection.
InProceedings of the 6th IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM'06) ,
pages 828{833. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2006.
A. Chandrashekaran and I. Lane. Speeding up Hyper-parameter Optimization by Extrap-
olation of Learning Curves using Previous Builds. In M. Ceci, J. Hollmen, L. Todor-
ovski, C. Vens, and S. D zeroski, editors, Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery
in Databases (ECML/PKDD'17) , volume 10534 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science ,
pages 477{492. Springer, 2017.
B. Chen, H. Wu, W. Mo, I. Chattopadhyay, and H. Lipson. Autostacker: A Compositional
Evolutionary Learning System. In H. Aguirre and K. Takadama, editors, Proceedings
of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO'18) , pages 402{409.
ACM, 2018.
T. Chen and C. Guestrin. Xgboost: A scalable tree boosting system. In B. Krishnapuram,
M. Shah, A. Smola, C. Aggarwal, D. Shen, and R. Rastogi, editors, Proceedings of the
22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(KDD'16) , pages 785{794. ACM Press, 2016.
51

--- PAGE 52 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
K. Crammer, O. Dekel, J. Keshet, S. Shalev-Shwartz, and Y. Singer. Online passive-
aggressive algorithms. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 7(19):551{585, 2006.
Dask Development Team. Dask: Library for dynamic task scheduling , 2016. URL https:
//dask.org .
A. de Sa, W. Pinto, L. Oliveira, and G. Pappa. RECIPE: A grammar-based framework
for automatically evolving classication pipelines. In M. Castelli, J. McDermott, and
L. Sekanina, editors, EuroGP 2017: Proceedings of the 20th European Conference on
Genetic Programming , volume 10196 of LNCS , pages 246{261. Springer Verlag, 2017.
J. Dem sar. Statistical comparisons of classiers over multiple data sets. Journal of Machine
Learning Research , 7:1{30, 2006.
T. Domhan, J. Springenberg, and F. Hutter. Speeding up automatic Hyperparameter
Optimization of deep neural networks by extrapolation of learning curves. In Q. Yang
and M. Wooldridge, editors, Proceedings of the 24th International Joint Conference on
Articial Intelligence (IJCAI'15) , pages 3460{3468, 2015.
I. Drori, Y. Krishnamurthy, R. Lourenco, R. Rampin, K. Cho, C. Silva, and J. Freire. Au-
tomatic machine learning by pipeline synthesis using model-based reinforcement learning
and a grammar. In K. Eggensperger, M. Feurer, F. Hutter, and J. Vanschoren, editors,
ICML workshop on Automated Machine Learning (AutoML workshop 2019) , 2019.
C. Dwork, V. Feldman, M. Hardt, T. Pitassi, O. Reingold, and A. Roth. The reusable
holdout: Preserving validity in adaptive data analysis. Science , 349(6248):636{638, 2015.
T. Elsken, J. Metzen, and F. Hutter. Neural architecture search. In Hutter et al. (2019),
chapter 3, pages 63{77. Available for free at http://automl.org/book.
N. Erickson, J. Mueller, A. Shirkov, H. Zhang, P. Larroy, M. Li, and A. Smola. Autogluon-
tabular: Robust and accurate automl for structured data. arXiv:2003.06505 [stat.ML] ,
2020.
H. Escalante. Automated machine learning|a brief review at the end of the early years.
In N. Pillay and R. Qu, editors, Automated Design of Machine Learning and Search
Algorithms , pages 11{28. Springer, 2021.
H. Escalante, M. Gomez, and L. Sucar. PSMS for neural networks on the ijcnn 2007 agnostic
vs prior knowledge challenge. In 2007 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN'07) , pages 678{683. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2007.
H. Escalante, M. Montes, and E. Sucar. Particle Swarm Model Selection. Journal of
Machine Learning Research , 10:405{440, 2009.
H. Escalante, M. Montes, and E. Sucar. Ensemble particle swarm model selection. In
2010 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN'10) , pages 1{8. IEEE
Computer Society Press, 2010.
52

--- PAGE 53 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
S. Falkner, A. Klein, and F. Hutter. BOHB: Robust and ecient Hyperparameter Opti-
mization at scale. In J. Dy and A. Krause, editors, Proceedings of the 35th International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML'18) , volume 80, pages 1437{1446. Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research, 2018.
M. Feurer and F. Hutter. Towards further automation in automl. In R. Garnett, F. Hutter J.
Vanschoren, P. Brazdil, R. Caruana, C. Giraud-Carrier, I. Guyon, and B. K egl, editors,
ICML workshop on Automated Machine Learning (AutoML workshop 2018) , 2018.
M. Feurer, A. Klein, K. Eggensperger, J. Springenberg, M. Blum, and F. Hutter. Ecient
and robust automated machine learning. In C. Cortes, N. Lawrence, D. Lee, M. Sugiyama,
and R. Garnett, editors, Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS'15) , pages 2962{2970. Curran As-
sociates, 2015a.
M. Feurer, J. Springenberg, and F. Hutter. Initializing Bayesian Hyperparameter Optimiza-
tion via meta-learning. In B. Bonet and S. Koenig, editors, Proceedings of the Twenty-
ninth National Conference on Articial Intelligence (AAAI'15) , pages 1128{1135. AAAI
Press, 2015b.
M. Feurer, K. Eggensperger, S. Falkner, M. Lindauer, and F. Hutter. Practical automated
machine learning for the automl challenge 2018. In R. Garnett, F. Hutter J. Vanschoren,
P. Brazdil, R. Caruana, C. Giraud-Carrier, I. Guyon, and B. K egl, editors, ICML work-
shop on Automated Machine Learning (AutoML workshop 2018) , 2018.
M. Feurer, A. Klein, K. Eggensperger, J. Springenberg, M. Blum, and F. Hutter. Auto-
sklearn: Ecient and robust automated machine learning. In Hutter et al. (2019), chap-
ter 6, pages 113{134. Available for free at http://automl.org/book.
M. Feurer, J. van Rijn, A. Kadra, P. Gijsbers, N. Mallik, S. Ravi, A. M uller, J. Vanschoren,
and F. Hutter. OpenML-Python: an extensible Python API for OpenML. Journal of
Machine Learning Research , 22(100):1{5, 2021.
A. Forrester, A. S obester, and A. Keane. Multi-delity optimization via surrogate modelling.
Proceedings of the royal society A: mathematical, physical and engineering sciences , 463
(2088):3251{3269, 2007.
J. Friedman. Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting machine. Annals of
statistics , 29:1189{1232, 2001.
N. Fusi, R. Sheth, and M. Elibol. Probabilistic matrix factorization for automated machine
learning. In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and
R. Garnett, editors, Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS'18) , pages 3348{3357. Curran Associates,
2018.
P. Geurts, D. Ernst, and L. Wehenkel. Extremely randomized trees. Machine Learning
Journal , 63(1):3{42, 2006.
53

--- PAGE 54 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
P. Gijsbers, E. LeDell, S. Poirier, J. Thomas, B. Bischl, and J. Vanschoren. An open source
automl benchmark. In K. Eggensperger, M. Feurer, F. Hutter, and J. Vanschoren, editors,
ICML workshop on Automated Machine Learning (AutoML workshop 2019) , 2019.
C. Gomes and B. Selman. Algorithm portfolios. Articial Intelligence , 126(1-2):43{62, 2001.
I. Guyon, A. Saari, G. Dror, and G. Cawley. Analysis of the IJCNN 2007 agnostic learning
vs. prior knowledge challenge. In 2007 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN'07) , pages 544{550. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2007.
I. Guyon, A. Saari, G. Dror, and G. Cawley. Model selection: Beyond the
Bayesian/Frequentist divide. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 11:61{87, 2010.
I. Guyon, K. Bennett, G. Cawley, H. J. Escalante, S. Escalera, Tin Kam Ho, N. Maci a,
B. Ray, M. Saeed, A. Statnikov, and E. Viegas. Design of the 2015 ChaLearn AutoML
challenge. In 2015 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN'15) , pages
1{8. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2015.
I. Guyon, L. Sun-Hosoya, M. Boull e, H. Escalante, S. Escalera, Z. Liu, D. Jajetic, B. Ray,
M. Saeed, M. Sebag, A. Statnikov, W. Tu, and E. Viegas. Analysis of the AutoML
Challenge Series 2015-2018. In Hutter et al. (2019), chapter 10, pages 177{219. Available
for free at http://automl.org/book.
H2O.ai. H2O: Scalable Machine Learning Platform , 2020. URL https://github.com/
h2oai/h2o-3 . version 3.30.0.6.
M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann, and I. Witten. The WEKA
data mining software: An update. SIGKDD Explorations , 11(1):10{18, 2009.
C. Harris, K. Millman, S. van der Walt, R. Gommers, P. Virtanen, D. Cournapeau,
E. Wieser, J. Taylor, S. Berg, N. Smith, R. Kern, M. Picus, S. Hoyer, M. van Kerk-
wijk, M. Brett, A. Haldane, J. del R o, M. Wiebe, P. Peterson, P. G erard-Marchant,
K. Sheppard, T. Reddy, W. Weckesser, H. Abbasi, C. Gohlke, and T. Oliphant. Array
programming with numpy. Nature , 585(7825):357{362, 2020.
T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, and J. Friedman. The Elements of Statistical Learning . Springer,
2001.
Y. Heetz, R. Vainshtein, G. Katz, and L. Rokach. DeepLine: AutoML Tool for Pipelines
Generation using Deep Reinforcement Learning and Hierarchical Actions Filtering. In
J. Tang and B. Prakash, editors, Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD'20) , pages 2103{2113. ACM
Press, 2020.
R. Henery. Methods for comparison. In Machine Learning, Neural and Statistical Classi-
cation , chapter 7, pages 107{124. Ellis Horwood, 1994.
B. Huberman, R. Lukose, and T. Hogg. An economic approach to hard computational
problems. Science , 275:51{54, 1997.
54

--- PAGE 55 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
J. Hunter. Matplotlib: A 2d graphics environment. Computing in Science & Engineering ,
9(3):90{95, 2007.
F. Hutter, H. Hoos, K. Leyton-Brown, and T. St utzle. ParamILS: An automatic algorithm
conguration framework. Journal of Articial Intelligence Research , 36:267{306, 2009.
F. Hutter, H. Hoos, and K. Leyton-Brown. Sequential model-based optimization for gen-
eral algorithm conguration. In C. Coello, editor, Proceedings of the Fifth International
Conference on Learning and Intelligent Optimization (LION'11) , volume 6683 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science , pages 507{523. Springer, 2011.
F. Hutter, L. Kottho, and J. Vanschoren, editors. Automated Machine Learning: Methods,
Systems, Challenges . Springer, 2019. Available for free at http://automl.org/book.
K. Jamieson and A. Talwalkar. Non-stochastic best arm identication and Hyperparameter
Optimization. In A. Gretton and C. Robert, editors, Proceedings of the Seventeenth Inter-
national Conference on Articial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS'16) , volume 51.
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2016.
H. Jin, Q. Song, and X. Hu. Auto-Keras: An ecient neural architecture search system. In
A. Teredesai, V. Kumar, Y. Li, R. Rosales, E. Terzi, and G. Karypis, editors, Proceedings
of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data
Mining (KDD'19) , pages 1946{1956. ACM Press, 2019.
A. Kalousis and M. Hilario. Representational Issues in Meta-Learning. In T. Fawcett and
N. Mishra, editors, Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML'03) , pages 313{320. Omnipress, 2003.
K. Kandasamy, G. Dasarathy, J. Schneider, and B. P oczos. Multi-delity Bayesian Optimi-
sation with Continuous Approximations. In D. Precup and Y. Teh, editors, Proceedings
of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML'17) , volume 70, pages
1799{1808. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2017.
Z. Karnin, T. Koren, and O. Somekh. Almost optimal exploration in multi-armed bandits. In
S. Dasgupta and D. McAllester, editors, Proceedings of the 30th International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML'13) , pages 1238{1246. Omnipress, 2013.
G. Ke, Q. Meng, T. Finley, T. Wang, W. Chen, W. Ma, Q. Ye, and T.-Y. Liu. Lightgbm: A
highly ecient gradient boosting decision tree. In I. Guyon, U. von Luxburg, S. Bengio,
H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, Proceedings of the
30th International Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS'17) . Curran Associates, 2017.
P. Kerschke, H. Hoos, F. Neumann, and H. Trautmann. Automated algorithm selection:
Survey and perspectives. Evolutionary Computation , 27(1):3{45, 2019.
A. Klein, S. Falkner, S. Bartels, P. Hennig, and F. Hutter. Fast Bayesian optimization of
machine learning hyperparameters on large datasets. In A. Singh and J. Zhu, editors,
Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Conference on Articial Intelligence and
Statistics (AISTATS'17) , volume 54. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, 2017a.
55

--- PAGE 56 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
A. Klein, S. Falkner, J. Springenberg, and F. Hutter. Learning curve prediction with
Bayesian neural networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR'17) , 2017b. Published online: iclr.cc .
R. Kleinberg, K. Leyton-Brown, and B. Lucier. Eciency through procrastination: Ap-
proximately optimal algorithm conguration with runtime guarantees. In C. Sierra, ed-
itor, Proceedings of the 26th International Joint Conference on Articial Intelligence
(IJCAI'17) , pages 2023{2031, 2017.
R. Kohavi. A study of cross-validation and bootstrap for accuracy estimation and model
selection. In C. Mellish, editor, Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference on
Articial Intelligence (IJCAI'95) , pages 1137{1143. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1995.
R. Kohavi and G. John. Automatic Parameter Selection by Minimizing Estimated Error. In
A. Prieditis and S. Russell, editors, Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference
on Machine Learning (ICML'95) , pages 304{312. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1995.
B. Komer, J. Bergstra, and C. Eliasmith. Hyperopt-sklearn: Automatic hyperparame-
ter conguration for scikit-learn. In F. Hutter, R. Caruana, R. Bardenet, M. Bilenko,
I. Guyon, B. K egl, and H. Larochelle, editors, ICML workshop on Automated Machine
Learning (AutoML workshop 2014) , 2014.
L. Kottho. Algorithm selection for combinatorial search problems: A survey. AI Magazine ,
35(3):48{60, 2014.
L. Kottho, C. Thornton, H. Hoos, F. Hutter, and K. Leyton-Brown. Auto-WEKA: au-
tomatic model selection and hyperparameter optimization in WEKA. In Hutter et al.
(2019), chapter 4, pages 81{95. Available for free at http://automl.org/book.
J. Krarup and P. Pruzan. The simple plant location problem: Survey and synthesis. Euro-
pean Journal of Operations Research , 12:36{81, 1983.
A. Krause and D. Golovin. Submodular function maximization. In L. Bordeaux, Y. Hamadi,
and P. Kohli, editors, Tractability: Practical Approaches to Hard Problems , pages 71{104.
Cambridge University Press, 2014.
A. Krause, J. Leskovec, C. Guestrin, J. VanBriesen, and C. Faloutsos. Ecient sensor
placement optimization for securing large water distribution networks. Journal of Water
Resources Planning and Management , 134:516{526, 2008.
G. Kurtzer, V. Sochat, and M. Bauer. Singularity: Scientic containers for mobility of
compute. PloS one , 12(5), 2017.
E. LeDell and S. Poirier. H2O AutoML: Scalable automatic machine learning. In
K. Eggensperger, M. Feurer, C. Weill, M.Lindauer, F. Hutter, and J. Vanschoren, ed-
itors, ICML workshop on Automated Machine Learning (AutoML workshop 2020) , 2020.
R. Leite, P. Brazdil, and J. Vanschoren. Selecting classication algorithms with active
testing. In P. Perner, editor, Machine Learning and Data Mining in Pattern Recognition ,
volume 7376 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 117{131. Springer, 2012.
56

--- PAGE 57 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
L. Li, K. Jamieson, G. DeSalvo, A. Rostamizadeh, and A. Talwalkar. Hyperband: A novel
bandit-based approach to Hyperparameter Optimization. Journal of Machine Learning
Research , 18(185):1{52, 2018.
M. Lindauer, H. Hoos, F. Hutter, and T. Schaub. Autofolio: An automatically congured
algorithm selector. Journal of Articial Intelligence Research , 53:745{778, 2015.
M. Lindauer, H. Hoos, K. Leyton-Brown, and T. Schaub. Automatic construction of parallel
portfolios via algorithm conguration. Articial Intelligence , 244:272{290, 2017.
M. Lindauer, K. Eggensperger, M. Feurer, A. Biedenkapp, D. Deng, C. Benjamins,
T. Ruhkopf, R. Sass, and F. Hutter. SMAC3: A versatile bayesian optimization pack-
age for Hyperparameter Optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR)
{ MLOSS , 23(54):1{9, 2022.
S. Liu, P. Ram, D. Vijaykeerthy, D. Bouneouf, G. Bramble, H. Samulowitz, D. Wang,
A. Conn, and A. Gray. An ADMM based framework for automl pipeline conguration.
InProceedings of the AAAI Conference on Articial Intelligence (AAAI'20) , volume 34,
pages 4892{4899, 2020.
Y. Malitsky, A. Sabharwal, H. Samulowitz, and M. Sellmann. Parallel SAT solver selection
and scheduling. In M. Milano, editor, Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Con-
ference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming (CP'12) , volume 7514 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 512{526. Springer, 2012.
H. Mendoza, A. Klein, M. Feurer, J. Springenberg, and F. Hutter. Towards automatically-
tuned neural networks. In F. Hutter, L. Kottho, and J. Vanschoren, editors, ICML
workshop on Automated Machine Learning (AutoML workshop 2016) , volume 64. PMLR,
2016.
H. Mendoza, A. Klein, M. Feurer, J. Springenberg, M. Urban, M. Burkart, M. Dippel,
M. Lindauer, and F. Hutter. Towards automatically-tuned deep neural networks. In Hut-
ter et al. (2019), chapter 7, pages 135{149. Available for free at http://automl.org/book.
D. Merkel. Docker: lightweight linux containers for consistent development and deployment.
Linux journal , 2014(239), 2014.
L. Metz, N. Maheswaranathan, C. Freeman, B. Poole, and J. Sohl-Dickstein. Tasks, stability,
architecture, and compute: Training more eective learned optimizers, and using them
to train themselves. arXiv:2009.11243[cs.LG] , 2020.
F. Mohr, M. Wever, and E. H ullermeier. ML-Plan: Automated machine learning via hier-
archical planning. Machine Learning , 107(8-10):1495{1515, 2018.
H. Moss, D. Leslie, and P. Rayson. MUMBO: Multi-task max-value Bayesian optimiza-
tion. In F. Hutter, K. Kersting, J. Lijjt, and I. Valera, editors, Machine Learning
and Knowledge Discovery in Databases (ECML/PKDD'20) , Lecture Notes in Computer
Science. Springer, 2020.
57

--- PAGE 58 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
G. Nemhauser, L. Wolsey, and M. Fisher. An analysis of approximations for maximizing
submodular set functions. Mathematical Programming , 14(1):265{294, 1978.
A. Niculescu-Mizil, C. Perlich, G. Swirszcz, V. Sindhwani, Y. Liu, P. Melville, D. Wang,
J. Xiao, J. Hu, M. Singh, W. Shang, and Y. Zhu. Winning the KDD cup orange challenge
with ensemble selection. In G. Dror, M. Boull e, I. Guyon, V. Lemaire, and D. Vogel,
editors, Proceedings of KDD-Cup 2009 Competition , volume 7, pages 23{34, 2009.
R. Olson and J. Moore. TPOT: A tree-based pipeline optimization tool for automat-
ing machine learning. In Hutter et al. (2019), pages 151{160. Available for free at
http://automl.org/book.
R. Olson, N. Bartley, R. Urbanowicz, and J. Moore. Evaluation of a Tree-based Pipeline
Optimization Tool for Automating Data Science. In T. Friedrich, editor, Proceedings
of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference (GECCO'16) , pages 485{492.
ACM, 2016a.
R. Olson, R. Urbanowicz, P. Andrews, N. Lavender, L. Kidd, and J. Moore. Automat-
ing biomedical data science through tree-based pipeline optimization. In G. Squillero
and P. Burelli, editors, Proceedings of the 19th European Conference on Applications of
Evolutionary Computation (EvoApplications'16) , pages 123{137. Springer, 2016b.
L. Parmentier, O. Nicol, L. Jourdan, and M. Kessaci. TPOT-SH: A faster optimization
algorithm to solve the automl problem on large datasets. In IEEE 31st International
Conference on Tools with Articial Intelligence (ICTAI'19) , pages 471{478, 2019.
F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V. Michel, B. Thirion, O. Grisel, M. Blon-
del, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V. Dubourg, J. Vanderplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau,
M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and E. Duchesnay. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python.
Journal of Machine Learning Research , 12:2825{2830, 2011.
F. Psterer, J. van Rijn, P. Probst, A. M uller, and B. Bischl. Learning multiple defaults
for machine learning algorithms. arXiv:1811.09409 [stat.ML] , 2018.
M. Poloczek, J. Wang, and P. Frazier. Multi-Information Source Optimization. In I. Guyon,
U. von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the 30th International Conference on Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems (NeurIPS'17) , pages 4288{4298. Curran Associates, 2017.
H. Rakotoarison, M. Schoenauer, and M. Sebag. Automated machine learning with Monte-
Carlo tree search. In S. Kraus, editor, Proceedings of the 28th International Joint Con-
ference on Articial Intelligence (IJCAI'19) , pages 3296{3303, 2019.
S. Ramage. Advances in meta-algorithmic software libraries for distributed automated
algorithm conguration . PhD thesis, University of British Columbia, 2015. URL
https://open.library.ubc.ca/collections/ubctheses/24/items/1.0167184 .
S. Raschka. Model evaluation, model selection, and algorithm selection in machine learning.
arXiv:1811.12808 [stat.ML] , 2018.
58

--- PAGE 59 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
J. Reback, jbrockmendel, W. McKinney, J. Van den Bossche, T. Augspurger, P. Cloud,
S. Hawkins, gfyoung, Sinhrks, M. Roeschke, and et al. pandas-dev/pandas: Pandas 1.2.5,
2021.
M. Reif, F. Shafait, and A. Dengel. Meta-learning for evolutionary parameter optimization
of classiers. Machine Learning , 87:357{380, 2012.
J. Reunanen. Model selection and assessment using cross-indexing. In 2007 International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN'07) , pages 2581{2585. IEEE Computer
Society Press, 2007.
J. Seipp, S. Sievers, M. Helmert, and F. Hutter. Automatic conguration of sequential
planning portfolios. In B. Bonet and S. Koenig, editors, Proceedings of the Twenty-ninth
National Conference on Articial Intelligence (AAAI'15) . AAAI Press, 2015.
K. Smith-Miles. Cross-disciplinary perspectives on meta-learning for algorithm selection.
ACM Computing Surveys , 41(1), 2008.
C. Soares and P. Brazdil. Zoomed ranking: Selection of classication algorithms based on
relevant performance information. In D. Zighed, J. Komorowski, and J. _Zytkow, editors,
Principles of Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , volume 1910 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science , pages 126{135. Springer, 2000.
Q. Sun, B. Pfahringer, and M. Mayo. Towards a Framework for Designing Full Model
Selection and Optimization Systems. In Multiple Classier Systems , volume 7872, pages
259{270. Springer, 2013.
K. Swersky, J. Snoek, and R. Adams. Multi-task Bayesian optimization. In C. Burges,
L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani, and K. Weinberger, editors, Proceedings of the
26th International Conference on Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS'13) , pages 2004{2012. Curran Associates, 2013.
K. Swersky, J. Snoek, and R. Adams. Freeze-thaw Bayesian optimization. arXiv:1406.3896
[stats.ML] , 2014.
S. Takeno, H. Fukuoka, Y. Tsukada, T. Koyama, M. Shiga, I. Takeuchi, and M. Kara-
suyama. Multi-delity Bayesian optimization with max-value entropy search and its par-
allelization. In H. Daume III and A. Singh, editors, Proceedings of the 37th International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML'20) , volume 98, pages 9334{9345. Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research, 2020.
C. Thornton, F. Hutter, H. Hoos, and K. Leyton-Brown. Auto-WEKA: combined selection
and Hyperparameter Optimization of classication algorithms. In I. Dhillon, Y. Koren,
R. Ghani, T. Senator, P. Bradley, R. Parekh, J. He, R. Grossman, and R. Uthurusamy,
editors, The 19th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining (KDD'13) , pages 847{855. ACM Press, 2013.
A. Tornede, M. Wever, and E. H ullermeier. Extreme algorithm selection with dyadic feature
representation. In A. Appice, G. Tsoumakas, Y. Manolopoulos, and S. Matwin, editors,
59

--- PAGE 60 ---
Feurer, Eggensperger, Falkner, Lindauer and Hutter
Discovery Science (DS) , volume 12323 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 309{
324. Springer, 2020.
I. Tsamardinos, E. Greasidou, and G. Borboudakis. Bootstrapping the out-of-sample pre-
dictions for ecient and accurate cross-validation. Machine Learning , 107(12):1895{1922,
2018.
J. Vanschoren. Meta-learning. In Hutter et al. (2019), pages 35{61. Available for free at
http://automl.org/book.
J. Vanschoren, J. van Rijn, B. Bischl, and L. Torgo. OpenML: Networked science in machine
learning. SIGKDD Explorations , 15(2):49{60, 2014.
V. Vapnik. Principles of risk minimization for learning theory. In J. Moody, S. Hanson,
and R. Lippmann, editors, Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS'91) . Morgan Kaufmann Publishers,
1991.
P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. Oliphant, M. Haberland, T. Reddy, D. Cournapeau,
E. Burovski, P. Peterson, W. Weckesser, J. Bright, S. van der Walt, M. Brett, J. Wil-
son, K. Millman, N. Mayorov, A. Nelson, E. Jones, R. Kern, E. Larson, C. Carey, _I.
Polat, Y. Feng, E. Moore, J. VanderPlas, D. Laxalde, J. Perktold, R. Cimrman, I. Hen-
riksen, E. Quintero, C. Harris, A. Archibald, A. Ribeiro, F. Pedregosa, P. van Mulbregt,
A. Vijaykumar, Alessandro P. Bardelli, A. Rothberg, A. Hilboll, A. Kloeckner, A. Sco-
patz, A. Lee, A. Rokem, C. Woods, C. Fulton, C. Masson, C. H aggstr om, C. Fitzger-
ald, D. Nicholson, D. Hagen, D. Pasechnik, E. Olivetti, E Martin, E. Wieser, F. Silva,
F. Lenders, F. Wilhelm, G. Young, G. Price, G.-L. Ingold, G. Allen, G. Lee, H. Audren,
I. Probst, J. Dietrich, J. Silterra, J. Webber, J. Slavi c, J. Nothman, J. Buchner, J. Kulick,
J. Sch onberger, J. de Miranda Cardoso, J. Reimer, J. Harrington, J. Rodr guez, J. Nunez-
Iglesias, J. Kuczynski, K. Tritz, M. Thoma, M. Newville, M. K ummerer, M. Bolingbroke,
M. Tartre, M. Pak, N. Smith, N. Nowaczyk, N. Shebanov, O. Pavlyk, P. Brodtkorb,
P. Lee, R. McGibbon, R. Feldbauer, S. Lewis, S. Tygier, S. Sievert, S. Vigna, S. Peter-
son, S. More, T. Pudlik, T. Oshima, T. Pingel, T. Robitaille, T. Spura, T. Jones, T. Cera,
T. Leslie, T. Zito, T. Krauss, U. Upadhyay, Y. Halchenko, Y. V azquez-Baeza, and SciPy
1.0 Contributors. SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientic computing in Python.
Nature Methods , 17(3):261{272, 2020.
C. Wang, Q. Wu, M. Weimer, and E. Zhu. Flaml: A fast and lightweight automl library.
In A. Smola, A. Dimakis, and I. Stoica, editors, Proceedings of Machine Learning and
Systems , volume 3, pages 434{447, 2021.
Wes McKinney. Data Structures for Statistical Computing in Python. In St efan van der
Walt and Jarrod Millman, editors, Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference ,
pages 56 { 61, 2010.
F. Winkelmolen, N. Ivkin, H. Bozkurt, and Z. Karnin. Practical and sample ecient zero-
shot HPO. arXiv:2007.13382 [stat.ML] , 2020.
60

--- PAGE 61 ---
Auto-sklearn 2.0
M. Wistuba, N. Schilling, and L. Schmidt-Thieme. Learning Hyperparameter Optimiza-
tion initializations. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Data Science and
Advanced Analytics (DSAA) , pages 1{10. IEEE, 2015a.
M. Wistuba, N. Schilling, and L. Schmidt-Thieme. Sequential Model-Free Hyperparameter
Tuning. In ICDM '15: Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE International Conference on Data
Mining (ICDM) , pages 1033{1038. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2015b.
M. Wistuba, N. Schilling, and L. Schmidt-Thieme. Automatic Frankensteining: Creating
Complex Ensembles Autonomously. In N. Chawla and W. Wang, editors, Proceedings
of the 2017 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining (SDM'17) , pages 741{749.
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2017.
M. Wistuba, N. Schilling, and L. Schmidt-Thieme. Scalable Gaussian process-based transfer
surrogates for Hyperparameter Optimization. Machine Learning , 107(1):43{78, 2018.
D. Wolpert. Stacked generalization. Neural Networks , 5(2):241{259, 1992.
J. Wu, S. Toscano-Palmerin, P. Frazier, and A. Wilson. Practical multi-delity Bayesian
optimization for hyperparameter tuning. In J. Peters and D. Sontag, editors, Proceedings
of The 36th Uncertainty in Articial Intelligence Conference (UAI'20) , pages 788{798.
PMLR, 2020.
L. Xu, H. Hoos, and K. Leyton-Brown. Hydra: Automatically conguring algorithms for
portfolio-based selection. In M. Fox and D. Poole, editors, Proceedings of the Twenty-
fourth National Conference on Articial Intelligence (AAAI'10) , pages 210{216. AAAI
Press, 2010.
L. Xu, F. Hutter, H. Hoos, and K. Leyton-Brown. Hydra-MIP: Automated algorithm
conguration and selection for mixed integer programming. In Proceedings of the RCRA
workshop at IJCAI 2011 , 2011.
C. Yang, J. Akimoto, D. Kim, and M. Udell. OBOE: Collaborative ltering for AutoML
model selection. In A. Teredesai, V. Kumar, Y. Li, R. Rosales, E. Terzi, and G. Karypis,
editors, Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
Discovery & Data Mining (KDD'19) , pages 1173{1183. ACM Press, 2019.
C. Yang, J. Fan, Z. Wu, and M. Udell. AutoML pipeline selection: Eciently navigating
the combinatorial space. In J. Tang and B. Prakash, editors, Proceedings of the 26th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD'20) ,
pages 1446{1456. ACM Press, 2020.
Y. Zhang, M. Bahadori, H. Su, and J. Sun. FLASH: Fast Bayesian Optimization for Data
Analytic Pipelines. In B. Krishnapuram, M. Shah, A. Smola, C. Aggarwal, D. Shen, and
R. Rastogi, editors, Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD'16) , pages 2065{2074. ACM Press, 2016.
L. Zimmer, M. Lindauer, and F. Hutter. Auto-Pytorch: Multi-delity metalearning for
ecient and robust AutoDL. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine In-
telligence , 43(9):1{1, 2021.
61
