# 2311.08760.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: /home/admin88/arxiv-downloader/interpretability/2311.08760.pdf
# File size: 529896 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
arXiv:2311.08760v2  [cs.AI]  29 May 2025Forms of Understanding for XAI-Explanations
Hendrik Buschmeiera,c,∗, Heike M. Buhlb,c, Friederike Kerna,c, Angela Grimmingerb,c, Helen Beierlinga,c, Josephine Fisherb,c, André
Großa,c, Ilona Horwathb,c, Nils Klowaitb,c, Stefan Lazarovb,c, Michael Lenkeb,c, Vivien Lohmera,c, Katharina Rohlfingb,c, Ingrid
Scharlaub,c, Amit Singhb,c, Lutz Terflothb,c, Anna-Lisa Vollmera,c, Yu Wanga,c, Annedore Wilmesb,c, Britta Wredea,c
aBielefeld University, Universitätsstraße 25, Bielefeld, 33602, Germany
bPaderborn University, Warburger Straße 100, Paderborn, 33098, Germany
cSFB/Transregio 318 Constructing Explainability, Paderborn & Bielefeld, Germany
Abstract
Explainability has become an important topic in computer science and artificial intelligence, leading to a subfield called Explainable
Artificial Intelligence (XAI).The goal of providing orseeking explanations is toachieve(better) ‘understanding’ on thepart of the
explainee. However, what it means to ‘understand’ is still not clearly defined, and the concept itself is rarely the subject of scientific
investigation. This conceptual article aims to present a model of forms of understanding for XAI-explanations and beyond. From an
interdisciplinary perspective bringing together computer science, linguistics, sociology, philosophy and psychology, a definition
of understanding and its forms, assessment, and dynamics during the process of giving everyday explanations are explored. Two
typesofunderstandingareconsideredaspossibleoutcomesofexplanations,namely enabledness ,‘knowinghow’todoordecide
something, and comprehension , ‘knowing that’ – both in different degrees (from shallow to deep). Explanations regularly start with
shallowunderstandinginaspecificdomainandcanleadtodeepcomprehensionandenablednessoftheexplanandum,whichwe
see as a prerequisite for human users to gain agency. In this process, the increase of comprehension and enabledness are highly
interdependent. Against the background of this systematization, special challenges of understanding in XAI are discussed.
Keywords: understanding, explaining, explanations, explainable AI, interdisciplinarity, comprehension, enabledness, agency
1. Introduction
Due to recent technological developments, explainability has
become a widely discussed topic in computer science and artifi-
cialintelligence,givingrisetoanewsubfieldcalledExplainable
ArtificialIntelligence(or XAIforshort).It isalsoatopicof in-
terest in other disciplines, such as cognitive science, psychology,
(psycho-)linguistics,philosophyandeducation.Thefocusofthis
articleistoprovideatheoreticalconceptofunderstandingasa
resultofexplanation.Fromthisperspective,understandingisthe
goal of a successful explanation (Keil, 2006, p. 229) and “recipi-
ents of explanations, if the explanations are at all successful, are
expanding their understanding in real time”. Understanding has
implicitknowledgeparts(WilsonandKeil,2000,p.97)regarding
itsproceduralandnon-reflectivecomponents.Asexplanations
progress,thelevelofunderstandingincreases,butunderstanding
always remains incomplete (Miyake, 1986) and is not always
factual (Páez, 2019), among other reasons because explanations
areoftenshallow,dependingontheknowledgeandmotivationof
theexplainerandtheexplainee(WilsonandKeil,2000),andthey
have“relativelyunclearendstates”(Keil,2006,p.242).Thus,
whilethereisthusabroadagreementthatthegoalofexplanation
is understanding, we know little about how understanding can
be conceptualized, what forms of understanding can occur, and,
finally, how it can be measured. The aim of this article is to
∗Corresponding author.
Email address: hbuschme@uni-bielefeld.de (Hendrik Buschmeier)bringtogetherinsightsfromseveraldisciplinesandtodevelop
aconceptbasedontheirfindings.Wewillproposea four-field
model of understanding that provides conceptual clarification of
relatedterms andconcepts,and thusdistinguishesbetween dif-
ferent forms and levels of understanding. Our goal is to develop
amodelthatcanbeusedasaheuristictocapture,analyze,and
even measure different forms of understanding in the context of
XAIandbeyond,andthatcanbeoperationalizedininteractive
explanation systems.
The starting point of our considerations is a view of an
XAI-explanation as a co-constructive, interactive process to
whichboth humans andXAI orinteractive explanationsystems
contribute (Rohlfing et al., 2021). The goal of an explanation
–i.e.,theformand/orlevelofunderstandingitaimstoachieve
– depends on the goal of the explainer as well as contextual
and situational contingencies (Rohlfing et al., 2021). Rather
than focusing solely on the narrow case of explainability , i.e.,
understanding the inner workings of an AI system using XAI
methods,weconsiderXAItohaveabroaderscopeof explaining
moregenerally(e.g.,explainingaprogramminglanguageconcept
toanovicecomputerprogrammer,agrammarruletoasecond
languagelearner,oraboardgametosomeonelearningtoplay
it) fostering understanding and agency of humans. Accordingly,
we adopt a broad notion of ‘understanding’ as implemented
in and underlying everyday interactions and experiences with
algorithmictechnologyinsocio-technicalAIsystems.Incontrast
to other research on explanation, we do not focus on scientific
Preprint submitted to Cognitive Systems Research

--- PAGE 2 ---
explanationsbuton‘everydayexplanations’becausetheyshowa
greater variety with regard to the knowledge they mediate (Keil,
2006). Whilescientific explanations areregularly characterized
bywhy-questions (e.g., Chi et al., 1994), and thus aim primarily
to convey causal knowledge, everyday explanations often follow
other kinds of questions, such as what,where,how does it work ,
etc.(Klein,2009).Moreover,thequalityofeverydayexplanations
is more difficult to define – they can be very simple, incomplete,
inaccurate, or, in contrast, quite sophisticated (Johnson-Laird,
1983; Norman, 1988).
The above-mentioned disciplines have dealt with the problem
of understanding to varying degrees. While understanding is
a widely discussed topic in philosophy, it is not a topic in
experimental psychology nor is there a scientific concept of it.
Likewise, ‘understanding’ is hardly considered a research topic
in its own right in many disciplines (but see, e.g, Zagzebski,
2019).Nevertheless,thisarticlewillprovideasynthesisofsome
interdisciplinaryperspectiveson‘understanding’asaresultof
everydayexplanations,i.e.,non-scientificexplanationsthatoccur
in everyday contexts and can involve either humans or a human
andamachine.Theobjectiveistopresentamodelofthedifferent
formsof understandingthat can arisefrom them. Thisis highly
relevant for tutoring contexts (e.g., Chi et al., 2004; Miyake,
1986),classroominteraction(e.g.,Koole,2010;vandePoletal.,
2018;MartinsandGressevonWangenheim,2022),aswellas
for XAI (Rohlfing et al., 2021). We would like to argue that
a model that attempts to define and unify basic concepts is a
useful tool across disciplines because it can provide a starting
pointforbothfurtherempiricalanalysisandtheorydevelopment.
Whiletheproposedmodelisprimarilyconcernedwithcognitive
aspects, wewill alsoargue thatembodiedinteraction shouldbe
included.Withsuchaclaim,weintendtoexpandthenotionof
understanding from a purely cognitive conception to one that
includes bodily aspects. The model will be enriched by offering
a theoretical account of the assumed dynamics of understanding
by sketching how movement between the four fields can be
conceptualized.
1.1. Basic concepts and first examples
In this paper, explaining is conceptualized as a social inter-
active process(Miller, 2019) inwhich an explainer (‘EX’) and
anexplainee (‘EE’) iteratively co-construct anexplanans of
an entity that is explained (the explanandum ). This concept is
basedoneverydayexplanationswhich,incontrasttoscientific
explanations,arealwaysinteractiveandusuallyembeddedina
situational context. The explainer is an agent that can either be a
human or, as it is the case in XAI-explanations, an interactive
explanation system. Both partners are actively involved in the
explanatory process through mutual monitoring and scaffolding
(Rohlfing et al., 2021) and proposals have been made how to
model such activities for interactive explanation systems (Ro-
brecht and Kopp, 2023; Booshehri et al., 2024; Buschmeier
and Kopp, 2018). The goal of an explanatory process is for
the explainees to understand the explanandum with regard to
their situational objectives or purposes; the form and depth of
understanding,however,canvaryaccordingtotheexplainee’s
goalsaswellassituationalandcontextualcontingencies.Thisconceptofexplainingthatemphasizestheprocessratherthanthe
(normatively fixed) outcome differs from the view often held in
sciencethatexplanationsareproductswithformalizednormative
forms, and comply to rules of logic (Grimm, 2021). Everyday
explanationsalso includecausal,proceduralorconceptualrela-
tions (Quasthoff et al., 2017), but usually do not follow forms or
rulesofnaturalscience;neitherdotheynecessarilyaimatformu-
lating universal (scientific) laws. Instead, everyday explanations
are more tailored to the explainee’s situational objectives and
needs.Theyarethereforemorecontext-dependentthanscientific
explanationsandcorrespondinglymoreflexibleintermsofform
and content (cf., Miller, 2019).
In this article, we will focus on ‘understanding’ as knowledge
resulting from a given explanation. This should not mean that
explanationsalwaysleadtounderstanding;indeed,theymight
lead to a false impression of understanding, or they may lead to
nounderstandingatall,regardlessoftheexplanation’squality
(Hempel, 1965). In fact, the connection between explanations
andunderstandingisstillofdebateinphilosophy.Whilesome
arguethatunderstandingisconceptuallypriortoexplanations,
othersclaimthatunderstandingisinfactknowingwhatagood
explanationis,andthedifferencesbetweenunderstandingand
explanatory knowledge are only minor (Khalifa, 2017). While
thisisaninterestingdebateinitself,ourfocushereisdifferent,
namely to present a heuristics for forms of understanding which
can arise as a result of successful knowledge transfer through
everydayaswell asXAI-explanations.Wewillthus notgointo
the relation between the two any further; instead, we assume for
theoretical convenience that explanations can lead to knowledge
transfer and thus to understanding on the part of the explainee.
Beforepresentingaconceptualmodelofunderstanding,we
assume that the notion of knowledge should be clarified. As
mentionedabove,wefollowtheviewthatitisanexplanations’
objective to construct and transmit knowledge (Miller, 2019;
Quasthoff et al., 2017), and we assume that understanding some-
thing on the basis of an explanation means knowing something.
It should be noted that there is a debate in philosophy about dif-
ferences between ‘understanding’ and ‘knowledge’. Knowledge,
it is argued, can be rather easy to acquire, and objects of knowl-
edge can be isolated (Grimm, 2021). Understanding, in contrast,
seems to be more difficult to get because it involves connecting
isolated knowledge objects with each other and combining them
into a structured whole (Zagzebski, 2019). For the purpose of
this article, we neglect the debate about possible differences
betweenunderstandingandknowledgeandtaketheviewthatthe
differencesaremarginalatbest.However,buildingonprevious
scholarlyworkonknowledgeandlearning,asocialconstructivist
view underlines the importance of the subjective parts of knowl-
edge that arise from different goals, prior knowledge, etc. (cf.,
Palincsar,1998).Iftwopeoplereadthesamebook,theywillnot
have the same knowledge afterwards. Consider, for example, the
geocentricworldviewwiththeearthatthecenteroftheuniverse,
which was socially shared ‘knowledge’. Knowledge therefore
alsohassubjectivecomponents.Thisisespeciallythecasewhen
we talk about the knowledge that results from understanding
everyday explanations.
The different forms of understanding that an explainer is
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
1:𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟←99
2:while 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟 > 0do
3:output 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟“ bottles of liquid on the wall,”
4:output 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟“ bottles of liquid;”
5:output“If one of those bottles should happen to fall,”
6: 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟←𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟−1
7:output 𝑐𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟“ bottles of liquid on the wall.”
Example 1: A simple example illustrating a while-loop.
aiming for – or that are sought after by the explainee – are
reflected in the heterogeneity that can be found especially in
everydayexplanations.Inordertodealwiththisdiversity,wehave
developed a model that considers two types of understanding
as the result or goal of an explanation: comprehension and
enabledness . In addition, the model conceives of these types
as further differentiated by the level of understanding that can
beachieved,whichwelabel shallowanddeeprespectively(cf.
Graesser and Person, 1994, p. 127)). It should be noted that our
model,likeanymodel,issimplified(Bailer-Jones,2009)inorder
to provide a systematic examination of different forms.
The term comprehension can be roughly translated as ‘know-
ingthat’.Thisreferstosemanticoreventheoreticalknowledge
thatcanbeverbalized(‘declarative’knowledge).Atbestitisa
conceptual framework for a phenomenon that even goes beyond
whatisimmediatelyperceivable.Regardingthedistinctionbe-
tween shallow and deep levels of understanding, we assume that
formsofunderstandingcanalsobeeitherverysimple/shallow
forms, or rather deep.
Incontrast,theterm enabledness means‘knowinghow’.Again,
enablednesscanbeverysimple(‘tostartanInternetsearch,enter
thesearchterminthebrowser’)ordeep,e.g.,knowinghowto
programacomputergame.Thus,apersoncanbeenabledtoper-
formeitherasimpleroutineactionoracomplexaction.However,
complex actions regularly require some form of comprehension
to be enabled. We suggest that comprehension and enabledness
are generally interdependent.
In this article, we will use two examples to illustrate under-
standing (see examples 1 and 2): In the following, we would
like to explain the terms introduced above using example 1. It
looks at understanding in a technical context, namely the use of
astoppingcriterioninaniterationloopofacomputerprogram.
More specifically, example 1 is an illustration to learn how to
usewhile-loops incomputerprogramming.While-loopsarecon-
structsofprogramminglanguagesthatexecutethecodewithin
the construct as long as the while-condition attached to the con-
struct holds. In the example, a variable counter is decremented
by1as long as its current value is greater than 1. The specific
application of the example is to print the well known ‘99 bottles’
song1(Byrd,2010).While-loopsareknowntocauseproblems
forcomputerprogrammingstudents(QianandLehman,2017)
and could be a topic for an interactive explanation system in the
domain of computer science education.
Shallow Comprehension of the program would entail that it
1https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/99_Bottles_of_Beerwill print out the ‘99 bottles’-song on the computer screen.
Specifically,regardingthewhile-construct,shallowcompre-
hension could involve understanding that the indented lines
(3–7) are executed every time the while-loop is entered and
thatcounter >0in line 2 is the condition under which
the while-loop is executed.
Deep comprehension wouldgobeyondthisandmeantounder-
standthattheconditionofthewhile-loopactivelyinterferes
with the while-loop: the variable counter is decreased and
the condition reacts to this. Deep comprehension may also
detect a shortcoming of the program, i.e., that the lines
of the song are not printed correctly when the counter
equals one, as the grammatical agreement (number) be-
tween number and noun is violated (*“1 bottles”). Going
beyond this program, deep comprehension would also give
theexplaineetheinsightthatthewhile-conditioncouldalso
be used for different applications, e.g., to try to access an
internet resource over an unreliable connection until the
full resource has been downloaded.
Shallow enabledness would allow an explainee to change the
program, so that it would, for instance, start at 77 bottles or
decrease by 2 each step or stop early.
Deep enabledness would allow an explainee to resolve the ‘1
bottles’-problem mentioned above by rearranging lines and
combining multiple while-loops.
Example2examinesunderstandinginanon-technical,natural
context,namelytheuseofthe presentprogressivetenseinEnglish
by native and non-native speakers. While native speakers (at
least of certain variants or English) may use and understand
this construction intuitively, it can be challenging for learners
of English as a second language. For these learners, the concept
may need to be explained in a classroom setting or by an
interactiveexplanationsysteminthecontextoflanguageteaching.
Understanding of such explanations might also be analyzed with
respect to comprehension and enabledness.
Shallow comprehension ofthepresentprogressivewould,for
example,entailthattheexplainee,alearnerofEnglishas
asecondlanguage,isawarethatthepresentprogressiveis
atensethatexpresseseventsinprogressandhastheform
am/are/is and a verb + -ing.
Deep comprehension could mean thatan explainee also under-
stands the reasons why the present progressive should (not)
be used in certain contexts and that it is use to express a
certain grammatical aspect, namely progress.
Shallow enabledness of the present progressive would allow a
learnertocorrectlyputsentencesintheprogressivetense
without necessarily knowing when it is appropriate or not.
Deep enabledness allows an explainee to use the present pro-
gressivecompetentlywhenformulatingutterancesorsen-
tences in speech and writing.
Section 3, will look at both examples in more detail.
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
This example looks at a specific construction of natural
language use, specifically the English present progres-
sivetense. The present progressive is constructed using
“the present tense form of be + lexical verb in -ing form”
(CarterandMcCarthy,2006,p.598)andisusedfor,among
otherthings,“eventsinprogressatthetimeofspeaking”,
“repeated events in temporary contexts”, “processes of
change”,and“withadverbsofindefinitefrequency”(Carter
andMcCarthy,2006,p.601f),i.e.,itexpressesaspectgram-
matically.Theseusagecontextsmaybeintuitivetonative
English speakers, who may also be able to see the nuanced
differences in usage compared to the present simple tense.
However, learners of English as a second language, espe-
cially speakers of languages where there is no grammatical
aspect (e.g., standard German), need to understand how
and when to use the present progressive and may not even
have the concepts (e.g., that progressivity is grammatically
marked) to begin with.
Example 2: Grammatical aspect in natural language use.
2. Aspects of Understanding: Forms of knowledge
For our model of understanding, we follow primarily two
conceptualizations: the types and qualities of knowledge as
describedindetailbydeJongandFerguson-Hessler(1996),and
thetaxonomiesoflearningfromthefieldofeducation(‘Bloom’s
taxonomy’; Anderson and Krathwohl, 2001; Krathwohl et al.,
1969).
DeJongandFerguson-Hessler(1996)wereinterestedinknowl-
edge in instruction and learning and especially as a prerequisite
forproblemsolving.Theydistinguishedandelaboratedcharacter-
istics of different types of knowledge. In terms of understanding
as a goal and the achievement of explanations, two types of
knowledge are important: conceptual knowledge is “knowledge
of facts, concepts, and principles” (p. 107), whereas procedural
knowledge refersto“actionsandmanipulations”thattransform
one state into another. Thus, in our terminology, conceptual
knowledge describes ‘knowing-that’, and procedural knowledge
refers to ‘knowing-how’. In the context of XAI, we focus on
cognitiveformsofproceduralknowledge,suchaswrittendivi-
sionandprogramming.Actionsandskillswithahighermotor
component, such as cycling or knitting, may require other forms
of more embodied explanations (showing).
Despite thefunctional proximity betweenthe notions ofcon-
ceptualknowledgeandcomprehension,andproceduralknowl-
edge and enabledness, we prefer to use both comprehension and
enabledness inthecontextofeverydayexplanationtoemphasize
their association with explanation. The achievement of explana-
tions often goes beyond a specific domain and situation because
explanations are tailored to the goals of the explainee and the
situation. Withthe term ‘comprehension’wealso relateto the
work of Kintsch (e.g., 1998), who uses ‘comprehension’ for the
process of comprehension in the area of text processing.
Building on the taxonomy of qualities of knowledge also
developed by de Jong and Ferguson-Hessler (1996), we con-siderthefollowingcharacteristicstoberelevantfordescribing
understanding:
LevelBoth conceptual and procedural knowledge are described
as more or less shallow or deep. Regarding conceptual
knowledge, de Jong and Ferguson-Hessler (1996, p. 111)
illustrate the distinction with symbols or formulas on a
shallow level vs. concepts and their relations on a deep
level. Thus,deep comprehension mostlikely reflects highly
interconnectedandelaboratedconcepts.Shallowcompre-
hension would correspond to little interconnectedness, but
also to few concepts. In terms of procedural knowledge,
there are rules or recipes at a shallow level in contrast to
meaningful actions at a deep level.
Explainees may require different levels of understanding,
and explanations should be tailored to those needs (Wilson
and Keil, 2000). Thus, it is not always necessary – or
even annoying – to give or receive a long and complex
explanation that leads to deep understanding. Often the
explainer is satisfied with a single action or a simple fact.
Structure Knowledgecanbemoreorlessstructured,i.e.,singu-
larelementsofknowledgecanbeisolatedorrepresentedina
meaningful structure. This structure facilitates the retrieval
ofknowledgeandtheacquisitionofnewknowledge.Seman-
tic networks, for example, are used to visualize knowledge
structures.Thedistinctionbetweenknowledgeandunder-
standing of novices vs. experts (see Section 4.1) can be
capturedbydescribinghowelementsmightbestructured:
Theknowledgestructureofexpertsismorehierarchicaland
better organized than that of novices. Although level and
structurearecloselyrelated,anexplanationcanalsoleadto
a false structure at a very deep level.
Automation Automationofknowledgeisparticularlyimportant
forunderstandingandthereforeforexplanation.Consider
how difficult it is to explain simple skills like riding a bi-
cycle. This is because there is a strong distinction between
declarativeconceptualknowledgeandnon-declarativecom-
piledproceduralknowledge.Compilationenablesautomatic
processes. The term “knowledge compilation”, inspired by
computerscience,isusedbyAnderson(1983)todescribe
howmultiplecognitivestepsarecombinedintoasinglerou-
tine. Compilation involves two stages:composition, where
stepsare combined,andproceduralization, wheredeclara-
tive knowledge becomes automatic, resulting in more fluid
performance.
Weconceivecomprehensionasinvolvingconceptualknowl-
edge, i.e., remembering facts about and experiences with
various concepts such as theories and/or related routine ac-
tions. In contrast, enabledness is conceived as the ability to
performroutineand/orcomplexactions(mentallyandphys-
ically) in a competent and flexible manner. Furthermore,
whereas comprehension is always ‘explicit knowledge’ that
canbeacquiredthroughbooksorexplicitverbalinstruction,
enabledness consists at least in part of ‘tacit knowledge’
that is not easily shared (Lim and Ahmed, 2000).
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
However, conceptual knowledge can also be compiled, e.g.,
rote learning of definitions or mnemonic sentences instead
ofdeepcomprehension.Ontheotherhand,deepenabled-
nessrequiresdeclarative,mostlydeepcomprehension.In
addition to implicit learning of procedures as a basis for
skills,e.g.,nativelanguagegrammar,thereisexplicitlearn-
ing,e.g.,adultlearningofaforeignlanguage.Explaining
how to drive a car is a good example of how procedures
arefirstexplainedinadeclarativeway,andthenthesteps
are proceduralized and composed over the years (Ander-
son,1983). DeJong andFerguson-Hessler(1996) explain
automationbymentioningtacitknowledgethatcannotbe
expressed. In order to give an explanation, the explainer
needsnon-tacitknowledge,alsoofprocedures.Inthefol-
lowing sections, this intertwining of understanding quality
and type will be discussed in detail.
Modality Regarding modality, we added embodiment to the
verbal and pictorial aspects given by de Jong and Ferguson-
Hessler (1996). Embodied knowledge is conceptually simi-
lartoproceduralknowledge(Tanaka,2011,p.150),andit
canbebetterperformedthanexplainedverbally.Embodi-
mentplaysanimportantroleinlearningsituationswhere
new members of a (scientific) community are taught to
become skilled practitioners. Visibly embodied displays
(e.g., how to hold a pencil, how to hold a Munsell color
chart next to a piece of dirt to describe its color) are part
of the knowledge conveyed in such situations (Goodwin,
2013).
Generality Regardinggenerality,explanationandunderstand-
ing are domain specific. However, it is important to keep
in mind for the following discussion that an explainee may
be a novice with no understanding in one domain, but an
expert in another. Moreover, the given domain can be very
specific (e.g., the motivation of a particular person in a
particular situation) or on a more general level (e.g., the
motivation of people – even living beings).
Inadditiontothischaracterizationofdifferenttypesofknowl-
edge and their manifold qualities, as a further conceptualization,
taxonomies of learning objectives help to describe the types and
levelsofunderstanding(e.g.,Krathwohletal.,1969;Anderson
andKrathwohl,2001). AndersonandKrathwohl2001(summa-
rizedinAnderson2002)systematizeeducationalobjectivesin
twodimensions,thestructureoftheknowledgeandthecognitive
processes that are to be done with the knowledge.
Structure of knowledge Thestructureofknowledgeaimsata
differentiationoftheabovementioned‘typesofknowledge’.
It includes factual, conceptual, procedural, and metacog-
nitive knowledge. While factual knowledge contains the
basicelementsofadomain(e.g.,definitions),conceptual
knowledgecontainsthestructureofthebasicelements,e.g.,
principles, models, and theories. Comparable to de Jong
andFerguson-Hessler(1996),procedural knowledge aims
at‘howtodosomething’,suchasskillsandalgorithms.The
fourthformofknowledge,metacognition,willbeneglectedShallow
EnablednessDeep
Enabledness
Shallow
ComprehensionSect. 3.1 Sect. 3.2
Deep
ComprehensionSect. 3.3 Sect. 3.4
Figure 1: Types and levels of understanding as a four field diagram
inourpaper, becauseitisonlyofinterestinspecialexpla-
nations regarding (own) cognition. Thus, the categories of
knowledge are similar to the types of knowledge discussed
bydeJongandFerguson-Hessler(1996)withtheadditional
hint that there are very basic elements of knowledge. In
terms of understanding, factual and conceptual knowledge
aim at comprehension, while procedural knowledge, of
course, aims at enabledness.
Cognitive processes Theseconddimensionofthetaxonomyof
learningaimsatincreasingthelevelsof cognitiveprocesses
that can be done with knowledge, namely remembering,
understanding (note that this is a different use of the term),
applying,analyzing,evaluating,andcreating(ChiandWylie,
2014).Thisstrengthenstheaspectofthelevelofknowledge
introduced by de Jong and Ferguson-Hessler (1996). There
isagainincomplexityfromlowlevelcognitiveprocesses
likerememberingtoapplyingtohighlevelprocesseslike
creating something new – resulting in a hierarchy from
shallowtodeepunderstanding.However,assessingthelevel
ofunderstandingmakesitnecessarytotakeacloserlookat
theseprocesses.Forexample,whethercreatingsomething
new is a high-level process could depend on what is meant
by ‘new’ and the complexity of what is being created, e.g.,
a new sentence or a scientific article.
Buildingonthesetaxonomies,wefocusonthetwotypesof
understanding introduced above (comprehension and enabled-
ness) and the different qualities (levels) associated with them.
Wewillusethetermsshallowanddeepcomprehensiononthe
onehand,andshallowanddeepenablednessontheother.The
conceptualization in the form offourfields – as sketched in the
diagram in Figure 1 – is only for simplicity. We see the main
advantages of the model in its ability to map the process of
understanding at the different stages of the explanation process.
To avoid misunderstandings of the four-field diagram, it is
important to note that the distinction between shallow and deep
understanding is not dichotomous – there are fluid transitions
between the two extremes – nor are comprehension and enabled-
ness assumed to be independent (orthogonal) categories. The
levelofdepthdependsonthedomain,thegivenexplanation,and
the goal being pursued. Accordingly, there is no static definition
of deep understanding; instead, a change in depth is likely to
occur as soon as either the goal or the domain is changed. These
characteristics are discussed in the following.
Insummary, therearetwoformsof understanding–compre-
hensionandenabledness.Bothformsofunderstandingcanbeon
differentlevels,fromveryshallowtoverydeepunderstanding.
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thefourresultingcombinations(cf.Figure1)areintermediate
steps or final achievements of explanations with the possible
goal of agency, the ability to control and adapt the (digital)
environment(Passeyetal.2018;Section3.4).Thecombinations
willbecharacterizedinthenextsection.Onthisbasis,(inSec-
tion4)weexplaindynamicsofcomprehensioninexplanations,
takingintoaccounttworelevantaspects:Weconsiderdifferences
between novices and experts in explanations and discuss how in
thecourseofanexplanationcomprehensionandenablednessare
intertwined.
3. Forms of Understanding
In the following, we will explain how understanding can
be characterized for each of the four ‘fields’ on the basis of
examples1and2introducedabove.Therespectiveknowledgeis
clarified additionally by means of its assessment. Due to their
subject matter and also the amount of available research on it,
the sections differ in their extent.
3.1. Shallow comprehension, shallow enabledness
Weseethecombinationofshallowcomprehensionandshallow
enablednessasapotentialstartingpointforunderstanding.Thus,
this section will focus on the mental state before a change in
understanding, or here, before explanation. The first step is to
define the underlying conditions and premises of this stage. Any
process of understanding should begin with and be tailored
to the explainee’s mental representation model, which is built
from (prior) own and mediated experiences with the domain
and prior knowledge about familiar things. At the beginning
of an explanation, explainers and explainees need to establish
’commonground’(Clark,2014,p.109),whichinvolvesassessing
“what the other person knows at the start, then tailoring one’s
own contributions to add to the relevant common ground for
that occasion [...]”. Common ground is usually based on the
priorknowledgethatexplaineesbringtotheexplanationprocess.
Prior knowledge thus influences the course of the explanation
and the understanding that follows: Explainers can build their
explanation on it, and explainees’ mental processing of new
knowledge is influenced by it (Chi et al., 1994). Therefore, it
isparticularlyinterestingtoknowwhatpriorknowledgeisand
which parts of it are relevant for an explanation, and how the
explainercanidentifytheserelevantpartsofpriorknowledge.To
clarifythesituationinthisfield,webeginwiththetwoexamples.
Example 1. An example of people having shallow compre-
hension and shallow enabledness of a stopping criterion in an
algorithm might be novice programmers. Their level of under-
standingmight,forexample,becharacterizedbypriorknowledge
of and basic familiarity with the syntax of the conditional state-
ment in while-loops and using it to control for a specific number
ofiterations(e.g.,dothisexactlythreetimes),butnotknowing
(yet) that it can also be used in a more dynamic way ( a < b)
(shallowcomprehension)orhowtosetupsuchconditionsgener-
ically (shallow enabledness). Of course, novices can become
experts if they acquire the appropriate knowledge.Example 2. An example of persons having shallow comprehen-
sion and shallow enabledness of the English present progressive
tense could be beginning learners of English as a second lan-
guage. Depending on their first language, they (may or) may
not have prior knowledge of the function of the grammatical
constructions. Their level of understanding of the present pro-
gressive tensecould be characterized asbeing able toconstruct
simplesentencesusingthepresentprogressivetenseofanumber
ofverbsbecausetheseverbshavebeenintroducedtotheminthe
-ing form (shallow enabledness), but they are not aware that it
is a marker of a specific tense and do not know when to use it
(shallow comprehension).
First,wewanttodescribethedimensionsofunderstandingand
the possibility of going through the field of shallow comprehen-
sionandshallowenabledness.Tointroducechangesinthemodel
of understanding, we use the two dimensions of comprehension
and enablement as parts of this model.
We can imagine thata novice in the fieldof shallow compre-
hension and shallow enabledness has still low comprehension of
programming,doesnotyetunderstandthesyntaxoflinesofcode
completely,doesnotyetknowanyconceptsofiteration,andis
not yet able to formulate it generally. However, improving the
novice’sunderstandingrequiresfundamentalknowledgeabout
themeaningofthecodeortheabilitytointeractwiththealgo-
rithmtoobservechangesintheresult.Asisgenerallythecase
in all phases of an explanation and with regard to all forms of
understanding,therearecognitiveandmotivationalprerequisites
ofunderstandingatthebeginningofanexplanation.Inthefollow-
ing,wefocusinparticularonpriorknowledgeandmotivationfor
thesituationofshallowcomprehensionandshallowenabledness.
Wewouldliketoemphasizehowanexplanationcomesabout.In
thesituationthatisusuallyatthebeginningofadomain-specific
explanation,priorknowledge,whichisnotonlydomain-specific,
plays a crucial role. By looking at prior knowledge in this sec-
tioninparticular,weemphasizetheimportanceofother,more
general knowledge to characterize the basic knowledge in this
situation. With the increase in understanding in the course of an
explanation, does not only the explanandum change (cf. (Miller,
2019))) but also the specific prior knowledge. Motivation is also
a prerequisite for the (continuation of the) explanation in all the
formsofunderstandingdiscussedinthispaper.Wepresentthem
especially in this section to show that motivation is essential
to strive for an explanation as motivation is noteworthy for all
actions (cf., (Heckhausen and Heckhausen, 2018)).
PriorKnowledge. Priorknowledgeisthoughttoinfluenceco-
construction between the explainer and the explainee (Gentile
et al., 2021) because the explainer relies on the explainee’s
currently assumed prior knowledge to scaffold the explainee’s
understanding.However,agreateramountofpriorknowledge
on the part of both the explainer and the explainee does not
necessarily lead to better explanations (Williams and Lombrozo,
2010).Theinfluenceofpriorknowledgeinexplanationsseems
tobesimilartoitsinfluenceinlearningscenarios:priorknowl-
edge is not necessarily beneficial for the explanation process
(Simonsmeier et al., 2021). It was found that the effect of expla-
nationandtheamountofpriorknowledgeonlearningareneither
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
independent nor subadditive (Williams and Lombrozo, 2010).
Rather, they appear to have a nonlinear influence on learning.
An explanation guides the focus in acquiring new knowledge,
andpriorknowledgehelpstoidentifypatternsandconstraints.
Notallpriorknowledgeisusedasbyexplainersorexplainees,
only parts relevant to a task are activated (Dochy and Alexan-
der, 1995). However, these ‘relevant’ parts are relative to the
individualholdingthepriorknowledge(AlbaandHasher,1983).
Thus, the personal relevant knowledge is not necessarily identi-
cal for the explainer and the explainee; neither is the assumed
prior knowledge of the explainee on the side of the explainer
necessarily correct. The assumed knowledge is part of a mental
representation that the explainer has of his interaction partner,
the partner model (Brennan and Hanna, 2009).
AssessmentofPriorKnowledge. Theliteraturepresentsavariety
of methods for the scientific assessment of prior knowledge.
Theseincludeverbalmethodssuchas‘think-aloud’tasks,verbal
protocolsandaudittrails,andperformancemetricsonproblem
solving and troubleshooting or retention over time, as well as
methods specific to human-computer interaction, system usage,
userexplanationsofthesystem,anduserpredictionofsystem
performance (Sasse, 1991). The simplest method is to query
only the domain-specific prior knowledge (Best et al., 2004).
However,thismethoddiscardsmostofthetotalpriorknowledge.
An alternative approach is presented by Cole et al. (1986),
whouseacombinationofthreedifferentquestionnairestoassess
priorknowledge.Thefirstquestionnairetestspriorknowledge
using true/false questions about domain-specific conceptual
knowledge. In addition, they ask respondents to estimate their
priorknowledge,suchas“Howwelldoyouknow X?”Thelast
questionnairetestspriorknowledgebyaskingaboutfamiliarity
withthedomain,e.g.,“Howoftenhaveyouused X?”Inaddition,
the authors provide a questionnaire that asks about attitudes
towardsthedomain,astheyinfluencetheexplanation(Tobias,
1994) as much as the actual knowledge the participants bring to
an explanation.
Inadditiontopriorknowledge,themotivationbroughttoan
understandingprocessalsoinfluencesitscourse.WadeandKidd
(2019), for example, have shown a bidirectional relationship
between curiosity and learning. Therefore, the motivational pre-
requisitesfor comprehensionwill bediscussed inthe following.
Motivationalprerequisites. Regardingexplanations,theques-
tion is what motivates explainees to establish understanding of a
specific domain as a goal. Their motivation can be decomposed
into two aspects: The social motivation to follow the explana-
tion and the motivation to understand. Consider the situation
of students at school. Certainly, they are not always motivated
by interest, achievement, or usefulness of the subject, but they
knowthatitcanbeveryuseful(oreveninteresting)tofollowthe
teacher’s explanation.
To identify motivational prerequisites, a classical approach
describes motivation as influenced by expectancy and value.
Expectancy refers to “beliefs about how well they will do at
the activity” (Wigfield and Eccles 2000, p. 68, cf. Eccles and
Wigfield2020).Thesubjectivevalueofunderstandingisdividedinto at least two parts: understanding can have (1) an intrinsic
valueoftheactivityofunderstanding,arisingfromaninterest
in the explanandum or a relation to the explainee in the social
situation,or(2)understandingtheexplanationcanbeusefulor
valuable for achieving a goal, and thus has an extrinsic value
that does not lie in the action itself. For example, understanding
digital artifacts is useful or even required in the context of
school,university,andthelabormarket(e.g.Balletal.,2017).
Expectationaswellasvaluedependonthepreviousexperiences
oftheexplainee(BonanatiandBuhl,2021).Withtheexperience
that it is difficult to follow an explanation or that digital artifacts
are difficult to understand, one’s self-efficacy to understand
XAI-explanations is likely to be low. On the other hand, an
adequateexplanationincreasestheself-efficacytouse(digital)
technology (Weitz 2021; cf. technology acceptance models:
Davis1989,MarangunićandGranić2014).Bothexpectancyand
valuedependontheexplainee’sgoals(EcclesandWigfield2020,
cf. Covington 2000), such as learning the present progressive
tense for a test in school or for living in a foreign country.
3.2. Shallow comprehension, deep enabledness
Although one can think of specific skills or cases of this
formofunderstandinginitsmostextremeform,asweshowin
Examples1and2below,weargueinthissectionthatthereare
not many cases of more complex actions following explanations
that can be performed at the deepest level of enablement and
still have shallow comprehension. Instead, we argue for actions
that build on each other, that an increase in enabledness will
lead to an increase in comprehension, and that these dimensions
of understanding are intertwined. Thus, we also address the
transitions between types and levels of understanding. We begin
by describing how deeper enabledness can be achieved even
whencomprehensionisrathershallow.Inordertodescribethe
processes, we also briefly refer to shallow enabledness, thus
adding to the previous Section 3.1.
Example 1. An example of people who have only a shallow
comprehensionbutadeeperformofenablednessofastopping
criterioninanalgorithmcouldbeexperiencedself-taughtpro-
grammers who lack formal training in logic and algorithms,
but who can easily motivate their formulation of the stopping
criterion for a while-loop (shallow comprehension). However,
usingtheirexperienceandpossiblyautomatedknowledge,they
are able to get the conditional expressions right (deeper form of
enabledness).
Example 2. An example of people with shallow comprehension
anddeepenablednessoftheEnglishpresentprogressivetense
would be native English speakers who intuitively know which
form of the present tense to use and can construct it correctly
(deep enabledness). However, if they were asked to explain their
choiceofthepresentprogressivetense,theywouldnotbeable
to do so (shallow comprehension).
Besidesthe motivationalprerequisitesalready explained(Sec-
tion 3.1, the access to external resources (e.g., tools such as
web search, chatbots, FAQs, other people) may be relevant to be
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
enabledtoperformanactionwithoutnecessarilyhavingacon-
ceptualcomprehensionofthetask.Oneexampleistoprogram
anotherwhile-loopandmakeaquerytoachatbot(asanexternal
resource)tosupportthistask.Inthissense,a deeperenabledness
is characterized by flexibility and adaptivity in the use of the
external resources (e.g., novices vs. experts, see Section 4.1).
The more flexibly an explainee uses the resources and adapts
theirusetodifferentcontextualenvironments,thedeeperisthe
enabledness. Flexibility here means (i) various resources are
known, and (ii) contextual factors (such as time restrictions, cur-
rent(un)availabilityofanexternalresourceetc.)aretakeninto
accounttochoosetheappropriateresourcesinacertainsituation.
Adaptivity means the ability to select the appropriate resources
in novel contexts/in different contextual environments. In this
respect, deep enabledness allows someone to use their skills in a
widerrangeofapplications,andwithouttheneedforresources
beingpresentintheimmediateenvironment,becausetheycan
besimulatedusinginternalmentalrepresentations,e.g.,bymem-
orization (see below).However, thedeepest form ofenabledness
cannotbereachedwithoutanycomprehension,sincechoosing
whatthebest/mosthelpfulresourceisinacertainsituation,or
makingaconcretequerywhenusingsystemssuchaswebsearch
or chatbots, certainly presupposes some conceptual knowledge
of the problem or task (cf. Graesser and Person 1994 on the
relationbetweenaskingdeep-levelquestionsanddeepeningof
conceptual knowledge).
In contrast, shallow enabledness encompasses rather basic
actionsofanindividual.Thishas,forexample,beendescribedfor
earlyinfantdevelopment.Mandler(2012)proposesthataninfant
might be able to identify an object as belonging to a category
butthiscognitiveoperationisbasedonperceptualinformation
only and does not require an interpretation of spatiotemporal
information. A basic action is embedded in the external repre-
sentationsitselfandisexternallydriven(i.e.,thereisaperfect
matchbetweenthephysicaldispositionandtheenvironment;see
Identification/recognition in the listed abilities). In contrast to
deeper enabledness, only a limited number of external resources
are used and they are used context-dependent, in a given way
(e.g.,usingthesamequeryagain)andcannotbetransferredto
anotherorachangedcontext.The transitionfromshallowtoa
deeperenabledness comesbyexperience,i.e.,ahigherdegree
of flexibility and adaptivity is achieved by richer experience
(throughrepetitioninthesameoronlyslightlychangedcontexts)
and a far transfer of skill (Gardner, 1999). Enabledness without
deeper comprehension may also be achieved by memorizing
a number of steps, procedures or facts (rote learning) without
understanding the concepts behind it. However, this approach to
enabledness,thatBoalerandGreeno(2000,p.9)calla“ritualistic
act of knowledge reproduction”, may hinder progress in deep-
eningcomprehensionbecauseexplaineesmaybelessengaged
with theunderlying concepts. Deepercomprehension, however,
requires “thinking practices” (Boaler and Greeno, 2000, p. 9,
for mathematical learning). Therefore, we assume that deeper
enabledness as we have defined it, including a flexible use in
different contexts, cannot be accomplished by memorization or
rote learning.
Todefine comprehension ,amongotherswemadeuseofthetaxonomies proposed by Bloom (Krathwohl et al., 1969) and
Krathwohl(AndersonandKrathwohl,2001;Krathwohl,2002)
to classify learning objectives. They describe different cognitive
processes that a learner is able to perform within a learning
process.However,originallythereisnocleardistinctionbetween
enablednessandcomprehensionintheselearningtaxonomies:
Bloom’s taxonomy (Krathwohl et al., 1969) starts with early
processingmechanismsthatweascribetoenablednessbutnot
comprehension, whereas Krathwohl’s taxonomy (Anderson and
Krathwohl, 2001; Krathwohl, 2002) seems to require interpreta-
tion and memory from the beginning. To make the early steps
of understanding clear, we will therefore refer to Bloom’s tax-
onomy. Overall, we recognize that there is a progression from
being bound to perceptual information or the context to de-
contextualized knowledge that is more flexible and adaptive.
We view the boundedness to external resources not only to be
more shallow in terms of enabledness (see above) but also in
terms of comprehension. Therefore, the abilities described in
the first two stages on Bloom’s taxonomy seem to belong to
shallowcomprehension/shallowenabledness(seeSection3.1).It
isdifficult,however,tomakeaclearcutbetweencomprehension
andenablednessbecausethedifferentformsofcomprehension
onlybecomeobservablebyabilities,andthereforebyformsof
enabledness.
Identification/recognition Krathwohl et al. (1969) identified
the following abilities as reflecting the first steps of com-
prehension: Repeating, listing, labeling, completing, and
selecting. We propose that all of them afford a more or
less prepared context (i.e., external resources) in which the
knowledgeistriggeredtobeapplied.AccordingtoMandler
(2012), the operations at this level may be based on percep-
tualinformationonlyanddonotrequireaninterpretation
of the context. For the other abilities, based on the rich
context,onlylittleknowledgeorcomprehensionisrequired
toachieveanact(e.g.,tolabelsomethingortofillsomething
out).
Contextualization: Connection to the obvious/present The
second level, called "understanding" in Krathwohl’s
taxonomy (Anderson and Krathwohl, 2001), represents,
among others, the abilities of interpreting, exemplifying,
and summarizing. We propose that they require some
knowledgeto beconnectedtoanotherentity thatisobvious
or present in the environment (i.e., contextualization),
thus requiring a deeper comprehension than in the first
stage. Contextualization was recognized as a form of
interpretation of an activity based on cues from the
obvious/present and related to the process of inferencing,
which itself depends on the context of its occurrence (Auer,
p. 30). For our example 1, a reasonable explanation for
why the first result is ‘99 bottles ...’ is that counter is
initialized with ‘99’. This explanation simply accounts
for what can be given by referring to the present context,
without having to add anything to it. A deeper reason
goes beyond the obvious and offers a connection to what
cannot be perceived, such as what the output would be
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
if the code in line 1 or 6 were changed in a certain way.
Making connections is important in the learning process
(Gentner et al., 2003).
Applying (transitional step towards deep comprehension)
Weseethethirdstepofcomprehensionattheintersection
of shallow and deep, i.e., as intermediate, because it
requires applying the knowledge to a context that is not
necessarily prepared for it (i.e., the context does not trigger
a specific application). The application of knowledge
always leads to deeper enabledness.
Allofthethreeabove-mentionedstepsmaybetime-dependent
– comparable to cognitive mechanisms of mapping discussed for
word-learningininfancy(Wojcik,2013),i.e.,fast-mapping(short-
term;lessdemanding)andslow-mapping(requiringlong-term
memory; more demanding), or to different forms of cognitive
engagement of students (Chi and Wylie, 2014, p. 221). Chi and
Wylie(2014)differentiatebetweenrecall(whatweseeasshallow
comprehension), apply (at the intersection from shallow to deep
comprehension), transfer and co-create (deep comprehension).
Inthefollowing,wearguethatcomprehensionandenabledness
areintertwined.Wepresumethatmosttypesofdeepenabledness
would build on some kind of comprehension, and, vice versa,
deeperenablednessmightleadtoincreasedcomprehension:(i)
comprehension changes depending on enabledness and vice
versa, and (ii) comprehension, even shallow, only becomes
observable in physical and cognitive abilities that are also signs
of enabledness (cf. Section 4.2). Cases of extreme shallow
comprehensiontogetherwithextremedeepenabledness,orcases
of shallow comprehension and intermediate enabledness are
thereforehardtobedefinedandwouldcontradictallpropositions
made above. (iii) There is neurological evidence on language
production, according to which comprehension and enabledness
cannot be torn apart at the cognitive level because of shared
underlyingneurologicalrepresentations,atleastfromafunctional
perspective (e.g., Pickering and Garrod, 2013).
In terms of assessability of comprehension , the question is
how verbalization is related to the degree of comprehension.
Thisquestionarisesbasedonstudiesongestureuseandlearning
(cf. extensive work by Goldin-Meadow and colleagues, e.g.,
Goldin-Meadow 2017 for an overview): If comprehension is
shallow,apersonmaynotbeabletoverbalizeknowledge,i.e.,
theknowledgeismoreimplicit.However,Goldin-Meadowand
colleagueshaveshownthatother(communicative)behaviorsuch
asaperson’sgesturescanindicatesomeinitialcomprehension:
even though some learners failed to solve some mathematical
problems and were unable to explain their solution, their co-
speechgesturesconveyedsemanticinformationthatwasrelevant
tocorrectlysolvethetaskbutthatwasnotverbalized.Thus,itwas
assessablenonverbally.Thefindingthattheselearnersweremore
likely to benefit from further explanations was interpreted in
termsofthemhavingimplicitconceptualknowledge.Researchon
implicitconceptualknowledgehasfurthershownthatparticipants
were able to make judgments on whether a problem-solving task
is likely to be solvable or not, even when they were not able
to provide a correct solution themselves (Bowers et al., 1990).When comprehension becomes deeper, it becomes explicit, that
is, it can be verbalized, and is therefore assessable by asking
questions.
Intertwinementofshallowcomprehensionanddeepenabledness.
As mentioned above, we assume a strong intertwinement be-
tweencomprehensionandenabledness.However,itshouldnot
be understood as a linear increasing relationship. Instead, the
following three cases, see Figure 2, display the dynamic relation
between both forms of understanding.
The first case is a process at the transition from intermedi-
ate to deeper enabledness with alternating more shallow and
deeper comprehension (solid line in Figure 2), that may often
occurduringautomation,e.g.,inlanguage(L1)acquisition.If
somethingbecomesautomatized,enablednessbecomesdeeper,
butcomprehensionmaydecrease(Anderson, 1996;Boalerand
Greeno, 2000), as during the process of automation conceptual
knowledge becomes compiled, and therefore less accessible (see
Section 2). An example could be automation demonstrated by
highly proficient bilinguals in terms of their language switching
abilities in everyday life (Green and Abutalebi, 2013). Research
suggests that initially, during the early years of second language
acquisition, non-selective language activation occurs. However,
as both languages become dominant, the selection rules become
automatic. This leads to automatic concept switching, where
bilinguals become unaware of the switching rules and rely more
on external resources like social cues and a partner’s fluency
(Green and Abutalebi, 2013).
In the second case (dotted line in Figure 2), comprehension
staysataratherintermediatelevelalthoughenablingincreases.
This is only possible if multiple external resources are available,
flexibly used (see definition of deep enabledness) and combined
byaperson(e.g.,tosolveaprogrammingproblem,acolleague
can serve as an external resource, or in other situations, possibly
due to time restrictions, a web search could be another external
resource). However, we think that this scenario allows deeper
enablednessonlytoacertainextentbecausedeepenabledness
requires deep comprehension. An example representing this
couldbeasituationinwhichalayuserwithoutanyprogramming
skillscanrunascriptwritteninacertainprogramminglanguage.
With already available commands that can be placed on the
correctpositionoftheprogrammingconsole,thelayusermay
manage to complete the task successfully, and may even be
enabledtoreplicatethisinaslightlychangedcontext.Thus,their
enabledness becomes deeper (though only to a certain extent),
but comprehension (e.g., programming syntax and meaning)
would remain at a constant, more shallow level if no further
explanations are given.
Thethirdcase(dashedlineinFigure2)islinkedtothesecond
one. A progress in enabledness may result in a lagged, nonlinear
increaseincomprehensionfollowingfurtherexplanations,that
is, the progression in both forms of understanding is stepwise,
similartotheideaofbootstrappingfromdevelopmentalresearch
(Morgan and Demuth 1996; cf. Section 4.2). This is based on re-
search on automated processes in second language (L2)learning
(cf. Hao and Othman, 2021). Although L2-learners might en-
counter difficulties in the process of generating new knowledge,
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
forexamplethepresentprogressivetense,thisprocessmaybe
supportedbyestablishingrelationstopreviouslyacquired,related
conceptualknowledge,suchasthegeneraldistinctionbetween
present and past, as well as knowledge expressed in identifica-
tion of (in-)consistent syntactic constructions of the L2 based
on their L1 knowledge (cf. Mandler 2012; Fiorella and Mayer
2015, p. 7). At this stage, comprehension remains behind the
intermediatelevel,butenablednessmayincreaseprogressivelyif
L2-learners apply their previous conceptual knowledge by doing
andrepeatingrelatedexercises,e.g.,fillingmissingauxiliaries
‘tobe’ormissing-ingsuffixes.Learnersmayalsorelyonexternal
resources such as textbooks, resources for language practice,
or a human tutor to complete the tasks. Learning the different
application contexts of the English present progressive tense
would enable learners to use the present progressive without
recallingbasicconceptsand toapplyittovarioussimilarcases
in L2-learning.
Toconclude,inourviewandbecauseoftheintertwinement
there are only limited cases of really shallow comprehension
and deep enabledness, and there are no real life scenarios for the
extreme, i.e., shallow comprehension with intermediate-to-deep
enabledness.
Assessment. If we follow Krathwohl’s taxonomy, for which
we have argued that the first and second steps require rather
shallow comprehension, then tasks such as summarizing can
be used to assess shallow comprehension. To assess different
levels of enabledness, different tasks should be successfully
accomplished with the support of external resources (see above)
thatareeitherverysimilartothosepresentduringtheexplanation
(more shallow/intermediate enabledness) or that are modified to
assess whether the knowledge can be flexibly applied to novel
contexts or other use cases (deeper level of enabledness) within
the specific domain of what was explained.
Regarding automation, i.e., how efficient an explainee is,
differentmeasurescouldbeused,e.g.,processingtime,ornumber
of errors in relation to total performance. Since we have defined
automationascompiledknowledgethatmaybelessaccessible
toverbalization,theassessmentcouldalsoconsistoftwoparts,
ataskandaquestionnaire:iftheexplaineeisabletosuccessfully
accomplishthetaskbutisunabletoexplainwhyorhowitwas
done, comprehension is likely to be shallower. However, this
may alsobe an indicator of transitional conceptual knowledge
(Goldin-Meadow et al., 1993).
3.3. Deep comprehension, shallow enabledness
WithrespecttotheintertwinementdiscussedinSection3.2,
deep comprehension combined with shallow enabledness is a
rarecase.However,itisapersistentproblem,e.g.,ineducational
contexts, which are often ultimately aimed at in educational
settings. It can, and often does, occur without a translation
into “knowing how” as an indicator of shallow enabledness. An
example of lacking conditional or conditionalized knowledge
is a student with knowledge about learning strategies who, in
a school situation, does not recognize that a problem is about
learning strategies (and not about motivation, etc.). Another
example of a lack of compilation is a person who has a lot of
Shallow EnablednessDeep EnablednessDeep Comprehension
Shallow ComprehensionApplyingAutomation1
23Figure 2: Three cases illustrating the strong intertwinement between comprehen-
sion and enabledness.
knowledge about hand spinning (e.g., types and functions of
spinningwheels,propertiesoffibers,ideasoftwist,andthebasic
knowledge of how to spin and ply them into a stable thread).
Withouttheproceduralknowledgeofhowmuchtwisttheyarn
should have, how fast to draw out the fiber, how to stop the
wheel,andhowtocounteracterrors,thisdeepcomprehension
leadsonlytoshallowenabledness.Thisformofknowledgecan
therefore also be characterized as the combination of existing
conceptualoreventheoreticalknowledgewithalackofpractical
application, e.g., due to a lack of practice.
One reason for deep understanding and shallow enabling is
what has been called ‘inert knowledge’ (Whitehead, 1929, p. 5),
although it was more concerned with inert (scientific) ideas
than inert knowledge of individuals. More recent psychologi-
calresearchhasdemonstratedtheprevalenceandrelevanceof
this problem and suggested several explanations for it that are
different in nature and underscore its complexity (Renkl et al.,
1996). The relationship between deep understanding and shal-
low enabledness is here conceptualized in a very specific way.
Accordingtometa-processexplanations,theknowledgewould
be applicable, i.e., would result in enabledness, but external
prerequisites such as motivation or the perception of benefits of
applyingtheknowledgearemissing.Also,personsmightlack
information about when or where to apply knowledge, which
would also show up as shallow enabledness. Other explanations
focusonadeficiencyinthestructureofknowledge.Important
onesthatcouldalsoexplainthecombinationofdeepunderstand-
ing and shallow explanations are a lack of compilation and a
lackconditionalizedknowledge.Declarativeknowledgehastobe
compiledinordertobeused,andifcompilationisinsufficientor
ifapersonlacksknowledgeaboutconditionsinwhichknowledge
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
can or cannot be applied, shallow enabledness results. Finally, it
should be noted that theories of situated cognition do not regard
inertknowledgeasaproblem,butratherasduetothefactthat
knowledgeisboundtocertaincontextsandsituationsandtheir
specific conditions (e.g., Greeno, 1998).
Example 1. Our example of a programmer who fully grasps the
stoppingcriterionof thealgorithm,butis notableto formulate
it recursively might fit this explanation.
Example 2. Our example of a second language learner who
knows the concepts of the present progressive and how to build
it, but cannot formulate correct utterances spontaneously in a
dialogue might also fit this explanation.
3.4. Deep comprehension, deep enabledness
Following the definitions of comprehension and enabledness,
thecombinationofdeepcomprehensionanddeepenablednessis
animportantprerequisiteforwhatisoftenreferredtoas‘agency’.
Inthissection,afterpresentingwhatdeepcomprehensionand
deep enabledness would be in the case of the two examples, we
elaborate on the theoretical background of the term agency.
Example 1. In general, we reason that programmers have
‘agency’ if they can identify and formulate the stopping cri-
terioneffortlesslyandcorrectly.Forimplementingthealgorithm
in a certain context, they apply theoretical knowledge about iter-
ative algorithms and stopping criteria and consider the demands
definedbythecontext(comprehension).Furthermore,theyapply
thisknowledgewhendefiningthestoppingcriterioninaspecific
way, which is implied by the programming language that is used
(enabledness). Only if they do both and can flexibly combine
their understanding of the algorithm with their abilities to write
the program in a programming language, a performance of high
understanding, and thus agency, can be observed.
Example2. Agencyinthecaseoflanguagescanbedescribed
as communicating competently and appropriately in a foreign
languageandbeingabletogivereasonsforformulations.Forthis,
itisnotsufficienttobeacompetentspeaker;youalsoneedtobe
abletoreflectuponlinguisticchoiceswithreferencetoagrammar
system. A speaker competent in English would know that the
progressive is generally in the form auxiliary verb be + verb
endingin-ing,andtheywouldbeabletoadheretotheserulesin
writingandspeechaswell,withoutactivelythinkingaboutittoo
much. However, scholars with a large body of knowledge and
practical experience can additionally elaborate why in certain
contexts the present progressive tense is the correct choice, as
well as, for example, describe common errors of native speakers.
Simply knowing a handful of contexts and use cases of the
present progressive by heart would not be sufficient. Instead,
scholars can flexibly use and apply their knowledge to come up
withnovelcontexts,dependingonthesituation(e.g.,whenasked
a question about the rules by English language novices). The
fact that scholars have meta-knowledge and can flexibly use the
progressiveform(enabledness,knowing-how)incombination
withwhattheyknow(comprehension,knowing-that)showstheir
understanding and agency.Definitionsofagency. Agencyisdefinedinvariousways,which
is apparent as the term itself is often combined with another
term to form an open compounds part of a specific phrase
such as, for example, ‘digital agency’ (Arnold and Clarke 2013,
p. 736; see, e.g., Passey et al. 2018). There is the need for
scholarstoprovideaprecisedefinitionoftheterm(cf.Ahearn,
2001, p. 130) and the vagueness of the term is criticized, too
(Emirbayer and Mische, 1998). Different definitions help to
illustratetheproblem:Passeyetal.(2018)define‘digitalagency’
quite broadly as “Digital Agency (DA)—consisting of digital
competence,digitalconfidence,anddigitalaccountability—is
theindividual’sabilitytocontrolandadapttoadigitalworld”.
(Couldry, 2014), in his inaugural lecture, was more explicit:
First, agency, by which I mean not brute acts (of clicking on
this button, pressing ‘like’ to this post) but (following Weber)
the longer processes of action based on reflection, giving an
accountofwhatonehasdone,evenmorebasically,makingsense
of the world so as to act within it. Kallinikos (2002, p. 289f)
describes how technology may influence agency “by inviting
specificcoursesofaction”thatmaybeshapedtoacertaindegree
(‘malleability’)and,thatagencyis“capturedbythedistinctive
ways by which a technology invites people to frame a delimited
domain of tasks or activities and organize their execution”.
ArnoldandClarke(2013,p.751)definestudentagencyas“[t]he
discursive practice of positioning oneself or being positioned as
responsible”. Emirbayer and Mische (1998, p. 963) follow the
pragmatic tradition of Bourdieu and Giddens, who define “[...]
humanagencyashabitual,repetitive,andtakenforgranted—a
view shared by ethnomethodologists, new institutionalists in
organizationaltheory,andmanyothers”.AccordingtoSharma
(2008, p. 300) agency is a “contingently emergent feature of
situatedlocalaction”.Thus,humansdonotjusthaveagency,but
theycanshowagencythroughtheiractions.SiryandLang(2010)
describeagencyasafeatureapersoncanacquireanddevelop.
Thismeanshumansmayacquireagencyduringchildhoodand
education. Basu (2008, p. 891) describes agency as purposefully
examiningandreflectingtheactionsofoneperson;thefoundation
ofthisactingisthebeliefsandgoalsonepersonhas.Shesays:
“[...]Idescribeagencyaspurposefullyconsideringandenacting
bothsmall-andlarge-scalechangeinpersonalandcommunity
domains, based on one’s beliefs and goals”. Duranti (2005,
p.453)definesagencymorebroadly,assomethingentitiesare
having.Hisworkingdefinitiondefinesagencyasapropertyof
entitiesto(i)haveacertaindegreeofcontrolovertheirbehavior,
(ii) whose actions have a certain effect on other entities, and (iii)
whose actions can be evaluated for example for responsibility.
Agencyinthecontextofunderstanding. Amidtohighdegree
of enabledness combined with a mid to high degree of com-
prehension are needed for agency. If both are pronounced, an
individual is capable of actively manipulating and controlling
various situations flexibly, by using what they know to reach
individual goals. A high degree of comprehension and enabling
is agency as it is a prerequisite for various properties mentioned
indefinitionsbyPasseyetal.(2018)(“controlandadapt”),Basu
(2008) (“purposefully considering and enacting both small- and
large-scalechangeinpersonalandcommunitydomains,basedon
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
one’sbeliefsandgoals”),Duranti(2005)(havingacertaindegree
of control over one’s own behavior, having an effect on other
entities through one’s behaviour) and Sharma (2008) (“a con-
tingentlyemergentfeatureofsituatedlocalaction”perceivable
within actions”).
Thequestionofhowonewouldassessunderstandinginspe-
cific contexts and therefore, implicitly, how agency arises, is
challengingisthefactthatourconceptofunderstandingremains
alatentconstructthatisnottrivialtodefine.Especiallymental
operations like connecting new facts cannot easily be measured.
In other words, understanding cannot be assessed by asking
to recall facts. However, it can be observed when people are
engaged in unknown situations that require the utilization of
previously acquired knowledge and a person’s enablement. In
these situations, agency results in a flexible solution to the given
task. This approach adheres to Perkins’ idea of measuring the
‘performanceofunderstanding’(Perkins,1993,1998).Perkins
recognizes “understanding through a flexible performance crite-
rion” that “shows its face when people can think and act flexibly
aroundwhattheyknow”.Incontrasttothis,asignaloflackof
understanding is, “when a learner cannot go beyond rote and
routine thought and action” (Perkins, 1998, p. 42).
4. Dynamics of Understanding
Understanding is a process that unfolds over time when an
explanation is successful (Keil, 2006). In this section we offer a
conceptualizationofthedynamicsofunderstandingovertime.
We focus on two distinct aspects that were mentioned in passing
above: differences between novices and experts, and the inter-
twiningofcomprehensionandenablednessinthetransitionfrom
a lower to a higher form of understanding.
4.1. Novices and experts
Using the heuristics of our four-field diagram, an explainee
with shallow comprehension and shallow enabledness is con-
sidered a novice, while a deeply enabled explainee with deep
comprehension is considered an expert. The purpose of this sec-
tion is to outline some fundamental differences between novices
and experts with respect to the two types of knowledge.
First, novices and experts are assumed to differ in terms of
procedural and conceptual knowledge. Experts were found to
categorize problems by applying abstract solution procedures
(e.g., major physical principles), whereas novices build their
problem categorization on “the entities contained in the prob-
lem statement” (Chi et al., 1981, p. 15). In terms of problem
representation, experts translate features of the problem, thereby
activating abstract category schemes for a problem type that
are organized, for example, by universal laws or principles of
nature. In contrast, novices organize their representation of a
problem by schemata for object categories, thus staying on
more concrete levels when formulating the problem. However, a
novice can become an expert in a field by acquiring the relevant
domain knowledge. The concept of the beginner is therefore
fundamentally development-oriented.
Second, while domain knowledge is one aspect in which
novices and experts undoubtedly differ, they are also likely todifferintermsofexperience,e.g.,inacommunicativepractice.A
study investigating novice tutors’ abilities to assess and monitor
students’ knowledge was found to be profoundly inaccurate (Chi
et al., 2004).
In our attempt to go beyond classical cognitive psychology,
which distinguishes between experts and novices by focusing on
(domain)knowledge,wewouldliketoenrichthepairofterms
by bringing in constructive learning theory, which considers
contextorientationandsituatednessascrucial.Thefocushere
is on the interactive processes of how experts guide novices
into ways of participating in a practice after a shared goal has
been established in a given situation (Lave and Wenger, 1991;
Rogoff, 1990). For example, children are often referred to as
novicesbecausetheyarelessknowledgeable.Inconversations,
the more knowledgeable participant (i.e., usually the adult) pro-
vides interactive support to help the child perform a aspired task
(Woodetal.,1976).Goodwin(2013)broadenstheperspective
evenfurtherbyexplicitlyincludingthebodyintheconceptual
pair, thereby including multimodal aspects of interaction. He
points out that in order to become competent, novices need to
train both their bodies and the perceptually relevant structures
of the objects or surroundings to be scrutinized in order to be-
come skilled at performing a particular practice. In this sense,
Goodwin (2013) provides an anthropological view of embodied
cognition that sees body and mind as inextricably intertwined.
Understanding istherefore displayedthrough correctembodied
behavior, and teachers could use displays of embodied behavior
to assess students’ knowledge (see also Zukow-Goldring, 1996,
forperceptualstructureprovidedbycaregivers).Hindmarshetal.
(2011)showshowsupervisorsofdentalstudentsrelynotsomuch
on talk but on bodily behavior to assess their students’ ongoing
understanding: even though students may claim to understand a
procedure,thewaytheymovetheirbodiestolookintoapatient’s
mouth may actually reveal their lack of understanding of the
matter at hand.
Includingembodimentintheconceptualizationofunderstand-
ing adds a new perspective because it may provide a more
completeviewofunderstandingthansimplyfocusingoninternal
domains of knowledge. Novices wouldthen differ from experts
not only in terms of conceptualization and problem-solving
procedureswithrespecttoaparticulardomain,butalsointhat
theywouldnothavetheembodiedknowledgeofhowtoperform
a task (Zukow-Goldring, 1996). It has been pointed out that
knowledge and its asymmetries are relevant in distinguishing
between experts and novices. The next section looks at different
types of knowledge in this context.
4.2.Intertwinement of comprehension and enabledness: Transi-
tions between the forms
Theideafortheintertwinementofcomprehensionandenabled-
ness(seeSection3.2)isrelatedtotheconceptof‘bootstrapping’
whichmightbeanunderlyingmechanismfacilitatingthetrans-
gression from one part of the four-field diagram to another.
Bootstrapping is assumed as being a learning mechanism for lin-
guisticdevelopmentbywhichgrowingabilitiesononelinguistic
level, e.g., phonology, supports the progression on other linguis-
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
tic levels such as syntax or semantics (Morgan and Demuth,
1996).
Applying this to the different forms of understanding in our
four-field scheme, comprehension can be bootstrapped by en-
abledness because comprehension assumably deepens when
learningtoapplyaknowledgedomaintoanovelcontext/situation.
Viceversa,enablednessdeepenswithcomprehension,i.e.,learn-
ing more about covert mechanisms of a domain. As an example,
enabledness in programming a while-loop will improve when
the person learns more about programming languages. Thus,
bootstrapping could explain the transitions between different
forms and levels of understanding.
Thismechanismcanbeillustratedusingtheexample1forthe
earlystagesofunderstanding(seeSection3.1).Thechallengefor
a noviceis tounderstand byexplanationa stoppingcriterion of
aniterativealgorithm,ormainlytosetupastrategytounderstand
the basic theory of a while-loop in a programming language. To
describethestatesofthemodelofanovice’sunderstandingin
this example, we are looking at the transitions to other forms
ofunderstandingfromthefieldofshallowcomprehensionand
shallow enabledness:
(1) Shallow comprehension, shallow enabledness The start-
ing point depends on the novice’s prior knowledge. A
novicewithbasiccomputerscienceknowledgewillstartby
modifyingsamplecodefunctionsandexaminingtheresults
toimprovetheircomprehensionofthefunctionsandtheir
meanings.Anovicewithnocomputerscienceknowledge,
but with a higher conceptual knowledge about the syntax
of aniterativefunction, willstart toreproduce theresults
manually on paper. In both cases, interaction with the code
will increase the model of understanding in an exploratory
way.
(2) Shallow comprehension, increasing enabledness A nov-
ice with less conceptual knowledge about a while-loop,
butmoreknowledgeabouthowtointeractwithcode,can
try out the code example. The process of reproducing
themeaningofthecodewillincrease(i.e.,bootstrap)the
understanding of the syntax and meaning of an iterative
function. However, the lack of comprehension of the the-
oretical background and the repetition of such a function
(e.g., the stopping criterion) can also lead to irritations and
misunderstandings. Thus, an incorrect model for the theory
of a while-loop could be built up.
(3) Increasing comprehension, shallow enabledness
Increasedcomprehensioncanleadtoanunderstandingof
the code syntax and the overall goal of the function. For
example, a novice knows in theory that a while-loop needs
astopcriteriontoletthealgorithmsfinishacomputation.
But with shallow enabledness, the novice may not be
able to modifythe code independently without generating
errors. In addition, the novice may not be able to apply
theircomprehensiontonewcontextsoutsidethisspecific
example.
(4) Increasing comprehension, increasing enabledness A
novice with an increased comprehension knows themeaning of the symbols in the code and understands the
basic syntax. A novice might be able to understand the
theory of a while-loop, mainly by interpreting the iterative
repetitions in a given example, and reproduce the expected
results outside of that example.
These transitions can, for example, be classified in the field
ofshallowcomprehensionandshallowenablednessasfollows:
(1) The initial prior knowledge of a novice, (2) the process of
how to access conceptual knowledge without known theories,
(3) understanding the general theories without being able to
apply them, (4) building up a strategy to increase conceptual
knowledge by applying less or no known theories.
5. Conclusion
As shown in the previous sections, discussing the cognitive
side of XAI, it is important to consider types and forms of
humanunderstandingofexplanationsdependingontheirprior
knowledge,motivation,andgoals.Theseaspectsareincreasingly
considered in the XAI literature.
We suggested aspects and forms of understanding which
may occur in explanations between humans, but also in XAI-
explanations for human users. Considering the forms given in
our four-field diagram underlines that explainers as well as
explainees pursue many different goals: to be enabled to do
something, to comprehend something, or to achieve full agency.
This agency needs – as we assume – both, deep comprehension
and deep enabledness. There may, however, also be situations,
in which humans only strive for shallow enabledness and/or
shallow comprehension. The development of XAI technology
has to consider these possibilities as well.
Generally, understanding is a journey from shallow to deep
comprehension and enabledness, which results in both forms
being highly intertwined and in need of being considered. In
the end, it is not possible to reach deep enabledness without
comprehension. For XAI, it follows that the amount of infor-
mation required needs to be negotiated between the explainer
(which could be an XAI system) and their explainee. As an
important background of our contribution, Rohlfing et al. (2021)
conceptualizeexplainingasasocialpracticeinwhichexplainers
and explainees are equally involved in (and responsible for)
co-constructing the explanation and its understanding.
We consider these conceptualizations to be a concise theo-
retical structure for an interdisciplinary discussion and multi-
perspectivaldevelopmentandevaluationofXAItechnology,and
explaining and understanding more generally. Two issues that
we have not addressed above but that are highly relevant for
explainability are (1) the need to consider that humans often
have a subjective understanding that does not fully align with
their actual/objective understanding and (2) that our cognitive
approachofconceptualizingunderstandingneglectsthatexpla-
nationsalwaystakeplaceinasocialcontext.Weclosethispaper
by discussing these two aspects.
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
5.1. Subjective vs. objective understanding
‘Subjective’ understanding in explanatory interactions relates
to how well explainees think they have understood an expla-
nation,whereas‘objective’understandingdescribesthe actual
understandingexplaineeshaveoftheexplanans.Discrepancies
between an explainee’s subjective claims and their objective
understanding are to be expected (e.g., due to misconceptions or
unknown unknowns). Concerning the forms of understanding
proposed in this paper, an explainee’s subjective comprehension
is likely more prone to be misaligned to their objective compre-
hensionthan isthe casefor enabledness.The illustrationof the
assessment of the different formsof understanding in Section 3
showsthatresearchmakesuseofsubjectiveself-reportmeasures
of understanding as well as objective testing following learning
taxonomies.
The distinction between subjective and objective understand-
ing is also important in relation to biased responses – as men-
tionedabove.Aslongaswewanttomeasuresubjectiveunder-
standing,wehavetotakeintoaccountthattheanswersmaybe
biasedinsomeway.Thisisnotaprobleminitself,butitbecomes
a problem as soon as the bias is caused by the question posed by
anexplainer,whichismorelikelytohappenthemorecomplex
and detailed the question becomes.
In XAI, methods and interactive explanation systems that aim
at co-constructing the human user’s understanding, relying on
monitoringandadaptationprocessesfortailoringexplanations
tousers’needs(Rohlfingetal.,2021),needtobeawareofthe
difference between subjective and objective understanding. De-
pendingonthemodeofinteraction,evidenceofunderstanding
thatusersprovidecansimplybesubjective claimsofunderstand-
ing, (e.g., through the production of verbal acknowledgments
signals or indications of satisfaction in surveys) or demonstra-
tionsof understanding that are more revealing of their actual
understanding (e.g., being able to execute specific actions or
asking follow-upquestionsthat are contingent onunderstanding;
cf.Koole2010).XAIsystemsneedtobeabletoidentifythese
different types of evidence, weigh them accordingly, and assess
them critically when monitoring and adapting to their human
interaction partners.
5.2. Influences brought by society
Sofar,thequestionofthepotentialimpactofsocialprocesses
onexplanations andrelatedprocessesofunderstandinghasbeen
excluded. However, how explainable AI – or any other new
technology–isreflecteduponinsocietyhasimplicationsforthe
understandingoftheindividualsinteractingwithit,ashumans
constitute social reality by interpreting and creating their world
anditsobjectsininteractions(Rosenthal,2018).Sincethepur-
poseofco-constructingExplainableArtificialIntelligence(XAI)
is to support both machines and humans in their communication
witheachother,the understandingcapabilities ofbothshouldbe
considered. The considerations relate to social constructionist
approaches, according to which successful social acceptance,
adoption and understanding of newly introduced technologies
are highly dependent on the meaning co-constructed in social
interactions,i.e.,whenhuman(ornon-human)agentsorgroupmembers interact. In this context, group membership (e.g., con-
stitutedbygender,class,race,age, socioeconomicstatus) plays
a key role in the process of understanding technological novelty
and thusin explaining it. Groupmembership “determines what
is relevant and what is not” (Kronberger, 2015, p. 361). In other
words,goalsorrelationshipsmaybedifferentfordifferentsocial
groups.
The social constructivist view of human-human interaction is
alsorelevanttohuman-machineinteraction,andevenprecedes
it. Ehsan and Riedl (2020) emphasize the importance of a
human-centered approach to XAI. Following their ‘reflective
sociotechnical approach’, we propose a concept of reflective
understandingthat criticallyreflectsthedominantnarratives as
wellastheexplicitandimplicitassumptionsandpracticesofthe
field. Moreover, it is value-sensitive to researchers, designers,
and users of AI, including to those who tend to be excluded
fromtheconversationandaredeniedaccesstothetechnology
(Ehsan and Riedl, 2020, p. 461). In other words, in order to
understand how and why people act the way they do (e.g.,
adoption or non-adoption of a particular new technology) social
meanings, interactions and interpretations cannot be ignored.
Accordingly,explanationsmustalsoaddresshowpeopleinterpret
theirworldandhowtheyinteractivelycreatethisworld.Notonly
the perspectives and stocks of knowledge that we are aware of
should be of interest when designing an explanation, but also
implicit knowledge and the interactive creation of meanings that
people (users) are usually not aware of (Rosenthal, 2018).
In this paper, we have outlined a model of understanding that
prioritizes the individual cognitive aspects of understanding.
However,weproposetoaddasocialdimensionthatinevitably
informs cognitive processes in ways that are conducive to a con-
ceptualizationofco-constructiveexplanatoryprocesses.Thus,
we argue for a broad notion of understanding that goes beyond a
cognitivemodelthatconceivesofcomprehensionandenabled-
ness as discrete processes occurring in the minds of explainees,
and argue that aspects such as context, interaction, or group
membership, as well as broader socio-technical relations and
references,shouldalsobeconsideredinthedevelopmentofXAI
technology.
Applying our concept of agency (see Section 3.4), a high
degree of comprehension and enabledness is characterized by
healthy distrust (Visser et al., 2023), deep enablement, knowl-
edge of the strengths and power, but also of the limitations,
biases, and potential for and actualization of oppression and
exclusion that AI technology entails. In addition, agency means
being empowered to overcome socially and technologically con-
solidatedmarginalization/discriminationthatmayberelatedto
group membership. Thus, in order to support agency, explainers
(human or XAI) should take into account explainees’ group-
related inequalities and differences, as well as varying access to
resourcesandpositions/rolesinsocio-technicalsystems,because
group affiliation “determines what is relevant and what is not”
(Kronberger, 2015, p. 361). Indeed, we see this as inevitable
for AI development because a conceptualization of human un-
derstanding of XAI-explanations without context is insufficient,
andconceptsofhumanunderstandingshouldbecentraltothe
researchanddesignofXAImethodsandtechnologysothatthey
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
can do justice to the humans they aim to empower.
Author Contributions
Helen Beierling : Writing – Original Draft. Heike M. Buhl :
Supervision, Conceptualization, Writing – Original Draft, Writ-
ing - Review & Editing. Hendrik Buschmeier : Supervision,
Conceptualization,Writing–OriginalDraft,Writing-Review
& Editing. Josephine Fisher : Writing – Original Draft. An-
gela Grimminger : Conceptualization, Writing – Original Draft.
André Groß : Writing – Original Draft. Ilona Horwath : Con-
ceptualization, Writing –Original Draft. Friederike Kern : Su-
pervision, Conceptualization, Writing – Original Draft, Writing
– Review & Editing. Nils Kloweit : Writing – Original Draft.
Stefan Lazarov : Writing – Original Draft. Michael Lenke :
Writing – Original Draft. Vivien Lohmer : Writing – Original
Draft.Katharina Rohlfing : Writing – Original Draft. Ingrid
Scharlau : Conceptualization, Writing – Original Draft. Amit
Singh: Writing – Original Draft. Lutz Terfloth : Conceptualiza-
tion,Writing–OriginalDraft. Anna-LisaVollmer :Writing–
Original Draft. Yu Wang : Writing – Original Draft. Annedore
Wilmes: Writing – Original Draft. Britta Wrede : Writing –
Original Draft.
Acknowledgements
ThisresearchwassupportedbytheGermanResearchFoun-
dation(DFG)intheCollaborativeResearchCenterTRR318/1
2021 ‘Constructing Explainability’ (438445824).
References
Ahearn,L.M.,2001. Languageandagency. AnnualReviewofAnthropology30,
109–137. doi: 10.1146/annurev.anthro.30.1.109 .
Alba, J.W., Hasher, L., 1983. Is memory schematic? Psychological Bulletin 93,
203–231. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.93.2.203 .
Anderson, J.R., 1983. The Architecture of Cognition. Lawrence Erlbaum,
Hillsdale, NJ, USA.
Anderson,J.R.,1996. ACT:Asimpletheoryofcomplexcognition. American
Psychologist 51, 355–365. doi: 10.1037/0003-066x.51.4.355 .
Anderson, L.W., 2002. Benjamin Samuel Bloom (1913-1999). American
Psychologist 57, 63–63. doi: 10.1037/0003-066x.57.1.63 .
Anderson, L.W., Krathwohl, D.R., 2001. A taxonomy for learning, teaching,
and assessing: A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy of educational objectives.
Longman, New York, NY, USA.
Arnold, J., Clarke, D.J., 2013. What is ‘agency’? Perspectives in science
education research. International Journal of Science Education 36, 735–754.
doi:10.1080/09500693.2013.825066 .
Auer, P., . Introduction: John Gumperz’s approach to contextualization, in: Auer,
P., Di Luzio, A. (Eds.), The Contextualization of Language. John Benjamins,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, pp. 1–39. doi: 10.1075/pbns.22.03aue .
Bailer-Jones,D.M.,2009. ScientificModelsinPhilosophyofScience. University
of Pittsburgh Press, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
Ball, C., Huang, K.T., Rikard, R.V., Cotten, S.R., 2017. The emotional costs
of computers: An expectancy-value theory analysis of predominantly low-
socioeconomic status minority students’ STEM attitudes. Information, Com-
munication&Society22,105–128. doi: 10.1080/1369118x.2017.1355403 .
Basu,S.J.,2008. Howstudentsdesignandenactphysicslessons:Fiveimmigrant
Caribbean youth and the cultivation of student voice. Journal of Research in
Science Teaching 45, 881–899. doi: 10.1002/tea.20257 .
Best,R.,Ozuru,Y.,McNamara,D.S.,2004. Self-explainingsciencetexts:Strate-
gies,knowledge,andreadingskill,in:Proceedingsofthe6thInternational
Conference on Learning Sciences, Santa Monica, CA, USA. p. 89–96.Boaler, J., Greeno, J.G., 2000. Identity, agency and knowing in mathematical
worlds,in:Boaler,J.(Ed.),MultiplePerspectivesonMathematicsTeaching
and Learning. Ablex, Westport, CT, USA, pp. 171–200.
Bonanati, S., Buhl, H.M., 2021. The digital home learning environment and its
relation to children’s ICT self-efficacy. Learning Environments Research 25,
485–505. doi: 10.1007/s10984-021-09377-8 .
Booshehri, M., Buschmeier, H., Cimiano, P., Kopp, S., Kornowicz, J., Lammert,
O., Matarese, M., Mindlin, D., Robrecht, A.S., Vollmer, A.L., Wagner, P.,
Wrede,B.,2024. Towardsacomputationalarchitectureforco-constructive
explainablesystems,in:Proceedingsofthe2024WorkshoponExplainability
Engineering (ExEn), ACM, Lisbon, Portugal. pp. 20–25. doi: 10.1145/
3648505.3648509 .
Bowers, K.S., Regehr, G., Balthazard, C., Parker, K., 1990. Intuition in the
context of discovery. Cognitive Psychology 22, 72–110. doi: 10.1016/
0010-0285(90)90004-n .
Brennan,S.E.,Hanna,J.E.,2009. Partner-specificadaptationindialogue. Topics
in Cognitive Science 1, 274–291. doi: 10.1111/j.1756-8765.2009.01019.
x.
Buschmeier,H.,Kopp,S.,2018. Communicativelistenerfeedbackinhuman–
agent interaction: Artificial speakers need to be attentive and adaptive, in:
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents
and Multiagent Systems, Stockholm, Sweden. pp. 1213–1221. doi: 10.5555/
3237383.3237880 .
Byrd, D., 2010. Infinite bottles of beer: A cantorial approach to Cantorian
arithmetic and other mathematical melodies. Math Horizons 18, 16–17.
doi:10.4169/194762110X524657 .
Carter,R.,McCarthy,M.,2006. CambridgeGrammarofEnglish. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Chi, M.T., Feltovich, P.J., Glaser, R., 1981. Categorization and representation of
physics problems by experts and novices. Cognitive Science 5, 121–152.
Chi, M.T.H., de Leeuw, N., Chiu, M.H., Lavancher, C., 1994. Eliciting self-
explanations improves understanding,. Cognitive Science 18, 439–477.
doi:10.1016/0364-0213(94)90016-7 .
Chi,M.T.H.,Siler,S.A.,Jeong,H.,2004. Cantutorsmonitorstudents’under-
standingaccurately? CognitionandInstruction22,363–387. doi: 10.1207/
s1532690xci2203_4 .
Chi, M.T.H., Wylie, R., 2014. The ICAP framework: Linking cognitive engage-
ment to active learning outcomes. Educational Psychologist 49, 219–243.
doi:10.1080/00461520.2014.965823 .
Clark, E.V., 2014. Pragmatics in acquisition. Journal of Child Language 41,
105–116. doi: 10.1017/s0305000914000117 .
Cole, C.A., Gaeth, G., Singh, S.N., 1986. Measuring prior knowledge, in: Lutz,
R.J. (Ed.), Advances in Consumer Research, Provo, UT, USA. pp. 64–66.
Couldry, N., 2014. Inaugural: A necessary disenchantment: myth, agency
and injustice in a digital world. The Sociological Review 62, 880–897.
doi:10.1111/1467-954x.12158 .
Covington,M.V.,2000. Goaltheory,motivation,andschoolachievement:An
integrativereview. AnnualReviewofPsychology51,171–200. doi: 10.1146/
annurev.psych.51.1.171 .
Davis, F.D., 1989. Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user
acceptance of information technology. MIS Quarterly 13, 319. doi: 10.2307/
249008.
Dochy,F.J.R.C.,Alexander,P.A.,1995. Mappingpriorknowledge:Aframework
for discussion among researchers. European Journal of Psychology of
Education 10, 225–242. doi: 10.1007/bf03172918 .
Duranti,A.,2005. Agencyinlanguage,in:Duranti,A.(Ed.),ACompanionto
Linguistic Anthropology. Blackwell, Malden, MA, USA, pp. 449–473.
Eccles, J.S., Wigfield, A., 2020. From expectancy-value theory to situated
expectancy-valuetheory:Adevelopmental,socialcognitive,andsociocultural
perspectiveonmotivation.ContemporaryEducationalPsychology61,101859.
doi:10.1016/j.cedpsych.2020.101859 .
Ehsan, U., Riedl, M.O., 2020. Human-centered Explainable AI: Towards a
reflectivesociotechnicalapproach,in:Stephanidis,C.,Kurosu,M.,Degen,H.,
Reinerman-Jones, L. (Eds.), HCI International 2020 – Late Breaking Papers:
Multimodality and Intelligence, Springer, Cham, Switzerland. pp. 449–466.
Emirbayer, M., Mische, A., 1998. What is agency? American Journal of
Sociology 103, 962–1023. doi: 10.1086/231294 .
Fiorella,L.,Mayer,R.E.,2015. Learningasagenerativeactivity:Eightlearn-
ing strategies that promote understanding. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
Gardner, H., 1999. Intelligence Reframed: Multiple Intelligences for the 21st
Century. Basic Books, New York, NY, USA.
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
Gentile,D.,Jamieson,G.A.,Donmez,B.,2021. Evaluatinghumanunderstanding
inXAIsystems,in:ProceedingsoftheACMCHI2021WorkshoponHuman-
Centered Explainable AI (HCXAI), Online. p. 25.
Gentner, D., Loewenstein, J., Thompson, L., 2003. Learning and transfer: A
general role for analogical encoding. Journal of Educational Psychology 95,
393–408. doi: 10.1037/0022-0663.95.2.393 .
Goldin-Meadow, S., 2017. Using our hands to change our minds. WIREs
Cognitive Science 8, e1368. doi: 10.1002/wcs.1368 .
Goldin-Meadow, S., Wagner Alibali, M., Breckinridge Church, R., 1993. Transi-
tions in concept acquisition: Using the hand to read the mind. Psychological
Review 100, 279–297. doi: 10.1037/0033-295x.100.2.279 .
Goodwin, C., 2013. The co-operative, transformative organization of human
action and knowledge. Journal of Pragmatics 46, 8–23. doi: 10.1016/j.
pragma.2012.09.003 .
Graesser, A.C., Person, N.K., 1994. Question asking during tutoring.
American Educational Research Journal 31, 104–137. doi: 10.3102/
00028312031001104 .
Green, D.W.,Abutalebi, J., 2013. Languagecontrol in bilinguals: The adaptive
control hypothesis. Journal of Cognitive Psychology 25, 515–530. doi: 10.
1080/20445911.2013.796377 .
Greeno,J.G.,1998. Thesituativityofknowing,learning,andresearch. American
Psychologist 53, 5–26. doi: 10.1037/0003-066x.53.1.5 .
Grimm,S.,2021.Understanding,in:Zalta,E.N.(Ed.),TheStanfordEncyclopedia
ofPhilosophy.MetaphysicsResearchLab,StanfordUniversity,PaloAlto,CA,
USA. URL: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/understanding/ .
Hao,M.,Othman,R.,2021. Automationoffunctionassignmentinthemodels
of speech production and second language acquisition. Education Research
International 2021, 1–9. doi: 10.1155/2021/2441598 .
Heckhausen,J.,Heckhausen,H.(Eds.),2018. MotivationandAction. 3rded.,
Springer, Cham, Switzerland. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-65094-4 .
Hempel,C.G.,1965. AspectsofScientificExplanation. TheFreePress,New
York, NY, USA.
Hindmarsh, J., Reynolds, P., Dunne, S., 2011. Exhibiting understanding: The
body in apprenticeship. Journal of Pragmatics 43, 489–503. doi: 10.1016/j.
pragma.2009.09.008 .
Johnson-Laird, P., 1983. Mental Models: Towards a Cognitive Science of
Language, Inference, and Consciousness. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
deJong,T.,Ferguson-Hessler,M.G.,1996. Typesandqualitiesofknowledge.
Educational Psychologist 31, 105–113. doi: 10.1207/s15326985ep3102_2 .
Kallinikos,J.,2002. Reopeningtheblackboxoftechnologyartifactsandhuman
agency, in: Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Information
Systems, Barcelona, Spain. pp. 287–294.
Keil, F.C., 2006. Explanation and understanding. Annual Review of Psychology
57, 227–254. doi: 10.1146/annurev.psych.57.102904.190100 .
Khalifa, K., 2017. Understanding, Explanation, and Scientific Knowledge.
CambridgeUniversityPress,Cambridge,UK. doi: 10.1017/9781108164276 .
Kintsch, W., 1998. Comprehension. A Paradigm for Cognition. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Klein,J.,2009. Erklären-Was,Erklären-Wie,Erklären-Warum:Typologieund
Komplexität zentraler Akte der Welterschließung, in: Vogt, R. (Ed.), Erk-
lären. Gesprächsanalytische und fachdidaktische Perspektiven. Stauffenburg,
Tübingen, Germany, pp. 25–36.
Koole, T., 2010. Displays of epistemic access: Student responses to teacher
explanations. Research on Language & Social Interaction 43, 183–209.
doi:10.1080/08351811003737846 .
Krathwohl, D.R., 2002. A revision of Bloom’s taxonomy: An overview. Theory
into Practice 41, 212–218. doi: 10.1207/s15430421tip4104_2 .
Krathwohl, D.R., Bloom, B.S., Masia, B.B., 1969. Taxonomy of Educational
Objectives: The Classification of Educational Goals, Volume 1: Cognitive
Domain. McKay, New York, NY, USA.
Kronberger, N., 2015. Of worlds and objects: Scientific knowledge and its
publics,in:Sammut,G.,Andreouli,E.,Gaskell,G.,Valsiner,J.(Eds.),The
CambridgeHandbookofSocialRepresentations.CambridgeUniversityPress,
Cambridge, UK, pp. 358–368. doi: 10.1017/CBO9781107323650.029 .
Lave,J.,Wenger,E.,1991.SituatedLearning:LegitimatePeripheralParticipation.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Lim,K.K.,Ahmed,P.K.,2000. Enablingknowledgemanagement:Ameasure-
mentperspective,in:Proceedingsofthe2000IEEEInternationalConference
on Management of Innovation and Technology, Singapore. pp. 690–695.
doi:10.1109/icmit.2000.916781 .
Mandler,J.M.,2012. Onthespatialfoundationsoftheconceptualsystemanditsenrichment. CognitiveScience36,421–451. doi: 10.1111/j.1551-6709.
2012.01241.x .
Marangunić,N.,Granić,A.,2014. Technologyacceptancemodel:Aliterature
reviewfrom1986to2013. UniversalAccessintheInformationSociety14,
81–95. doi: 10.1007/s10209-014-0348-1 .
Martins,R.M.,GressevonWangenheim,C.,2022. Findingsonteachingmachine
learning in high school: A ten-year systematic literature review. Informatics
in Education doi: 10.15388/infedu.2023.18 .
Miller,T.,2019. Explanationinartificialintelligence:Insightsfromthesocial
sciences. Artificial Intelligence 267, 1–38. doi: 10.1016/j.artint.2018.
07.007.
Miyake,N.,1986.Constructiveinteractionandtheiterativeprocessofunderstand-
ing. Cognitive Science 10, 151–177. doi: 10.1207/s15516709cog1002_2 .
Morgan,J.L.,Demuth,K.(Eds.),1996. SignaltoSyntax:Bootstrappingfrom
Speech to Grammar in Early Acquisition. Psychology Press, New York, NY,
USA.
Norman, D.A.,1988. The Psychologyof Everyday Things. BasicBooks, New
York, NY, USA.
Páez,A.,2019. Thepragmaticturninexplainableartificialintelligence(XAI).
Minds and Machines 29, 441–459. doi: 10.1007/s11023-019-09502-w .
Palincsar,A.S.,1998. Socialconstructivistperspectivesonteachingandlearning.
AnnualReviewofPsychology49,345–375. doi: 10.1146/annurev.psych.
49.1.345 .
Passey, D., Shonfeld, M., Appleby, L., Judge, M., Saito, T., Smits, A., 2018.
Digitalagency:Empoweringequityinandthrougheducation. Technology,
Knowledge and Learning 23, 425–439. doi: 10.1007/s10758-018-9384-x .
Perkins, D., 1993. Teaching for understanding. American Educator 17.
Perkins,D.,1998. Whatisunderstanding,in:Wiske,M.S.(Ed.),Teachingfor
Understanding: Linking Research with Practice. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco,
CA, USA, pp. 39–57.
Pickering, M.J., Garrod, S., 2013. An integrated theory of language production
and comprehension. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 36, 329–347. doi: 10.
1017/S0140525X12001495 .
van de Pol, J., Mercer, N., Volman, M., 2018. Scaffolding student understanding
in small-group work: Students’ uptake of teacher support in subsequent
small-group interaction. Journal of the Learning Sciences 28, 206–239.
doi:10.1080/10508406.2018.1522258 .
Qian, Y., Lehman, J., 2017. Students’ misconceptions and other difficulties
in introductory programming: A literature review. ACM Transactions on
Computing Education 18. doi: 10.1145/3077618 .
Quasthoff, U., Heller, V., Morek, M., 2017. On the sequential organization and
genre-orientation of discourse units in interaction: An analytic framework.
Discourse Studies 19, 84–110. doi: 10.1177/1461445616683596 .
Renkl,A.,Mandl,H.,Gruber,H.,1996. Inertknowledge:Analysesandremedies.
Educational Psychologist 31, 115–121. doi: 10.1207/s15326985ep3102_3 .
Robrecht, A., Kopp, S., 2023. Snape: A sequential non-stationary decision
processmodelforadaptiveexplanationgeneration,in:Proceedingsofthe15th
InternationalConferenceonAgentsandArtificialIntelligence,SciTePress,
Lisbon, Portugal. pp. 48–58. doi: 10.5220/0011671300003393 .
Rogoff, B., 1990. Apprenticeship in Thinking: Cognitive Development in Social
Context. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Rohlfing,K.,Cimiano,P.,Scharlau,I.,Matzner,T.,Buhl,H.,Buschmeier,H.,
Grimminger, A., Hammer, B., Häb-Umbach, R., Horwath, I., Hüllermeier,
E., Kern, F., Kopp, S., Thommes, K., Ngonga Ngomo, A.C., Schulte, C.,
Wachsmuth, H., Wagner, P., Wrede, B., 2021. Explanation as a social
practice: Toward a conceptual framework for the social design of ai systems.
IEEETransactionsonCognitiveandDevelopmentalSystems13,717–728.
doi:10.1109/TCDS.2020.3044366 .
Rosenthal,G.,2018. InterpretiveSocialResearch. GöttingenUniversityPress,
Göttingen, Germany. doi: 10.17875/gup2018-1103 .
Sasse, M.A., 1991. How to T(R)AP users’ mental models, in: Tauber,
M.J., Ackermann, D. (Eds.), Mental Models and Human-Computer Inter-
action 2. Elsevier, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, pp. 59–79. doi: 10.1016/
b978-0-444-88602-6.50007-4 .
Sharma,A., 2008. Making(electrical)connections:Exploringstudentagencyin
a school in India. Science Education 92, 297–319. doi: 10.1002/sce.20246 .
Simonsmeier,B.A.,Flaig,M.,Deiglmayr,A.,Schalk,L.,Schneider,M.,2021.
Domain-specificpriorknowledgeandlearning:Ameta-analysis. Educational
Psychologist 57, 31–54. doi: 10.1080/00461520.2021.1939700 .
Siry, C.A., Lang, D.E., 2010. Creating participatory discourse for teaching and
researchinearlychildhoodscience. JournalofScienceTeacherEducation
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
21, 149–160. doi: 10.1007/s10972-009-9162-7 .
Tanaka,S.,2011. Thenotionofembodiedknowledge,in:Stenner,P.,Cromby,
J., Motzkau, J., Yen, J., Haosheng, Y. (Eds.), Theoretical Psychology: Global
Transformations and Challenges. Captus Press, Concord, ON, Canada, pp.
149–157.
Tobias,S.,1994. Interest,priorknowledge,andlearning. ReviewofEducational
Research 64, 37–54. doi: 10.3102/00346543064001037 .
Visser, R., Peters, T.M., Scharlau, I., Hammer, B., 2023. Trust, distrust, and
appropriatereliancein(x)ai:Asurveyofempiricalevaluationofusertrust.
doi:10.48550/arXiv.2312.02034 ,arXiv:2312.02034 .
Wade, S., Kidd, C., 2019. The role of prior knowledge and curiosity in
learning. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review 26, 1377–1387. doi: 10.3758/
s13423-019-01598-6 .
Weitz, K., 2021. Towards human-centered AI: Psychological concepts as
foundation for empirical XAI research. it – Information Technology 64,
71–75. doi: 10.1515/itit-2021-0047 .
Whitehead, A.N., 1929. The Aims of Education and Other Essays. The Free
Press, New York, NY, USA.
Wigfield, A., Eccles, J.S., 2000. Expectancy–value theory of achievement
motivation. ContemporaryEducationalPsychology25,68–81. doi: 10.1006/ceps.1999.1015 .
Williams, J.J., Lombrozo, T., 2010. Explanation constrains learning, and
prior knowledge constrains explanation, in: Proceedings of the 32nd Annual
MeetingoftheCognitiveScienceSociety,Portland,OR,USA.pp.2912–2917.
Wilson, R.A., Keil, F.F., 2000. The shadows and shallows of explanation, in:
Wilson,R.A.,Keil,F.F.(Eds.),ExplanationandCognition.TheMITPress,
Cambridge, MA, USA, pp. 87–114.
Wojcik, E.H., 2013. Remembering new words: Integrating early memory
development into word learning. Frontiers in Psychology 4. doi: 10.3389/
fpsyg.2013.00151 .
Wood, D., Bruner, J.S., Ross, G., 1976. The role of tutoring in problem solving.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 17, 89–100. doi: 10.1111/j.
1469-7610.1976.tb00381.x .
Zagzebski,L.,2019. Towardatheoryofunderstanding,in:Grimm,S.R.(Ed.),
Varieties of Understanding: New Perspectives from Philosophy, Psychology,
and Theology. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, p. 123–136. doi: 10.
1093/oso/9780190860974.003.0007 .
Zukow-Goldring,P.,1996. Sensitivecaregivingfostersthecomprehensionof
speech: When gestures speak louder than words. Early Development and
Parenting 5, 195–211. doi: 10/ds6qjp .
17
