# 2310.08185.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: /home/admin88/arxiv-downloader/writing/2310.08185.pdf
# File size: 1349714 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
EIPE-text: Evaluation-Guided Iterative Plan Extraction for Long-Form
Narrative Text Generation
Wang You∗†Wenshan Wu∗‡Yaobo Liang∗Shaoguang Mao
Chenfei Wu Maosong Cao†Yuzhe Cai†Yiduo Guo†Yan Xia Furu Wei Nan Duan
Microsoft Research Asia
Abstract
Plan-and-Write is a common hierarchical ap-
proach in long-form narrative text generation,
which first creates a plan to guide the narrative
writing. Following this approach, several stud-
ies rely on simply prompting large language
models for planning, which often yields sub-
optimal results. In this paper, we propose a
new framework called Evaluation-guided Itera-
tive Plan Extraction for long-form narrative text
generation (EIPE-text), which extracts plans
from the corpus of narratives and utilizes the
extracted plans to construct a better planner.
EIPE-text has three stages: plan extraction,
learning, and inference. In the plan extraction
stage, it iteratively extracts and improves plans
from the narrative corpus and constructs a plan
corpus. We propose a question answer (QA)
based evaluation mechanism to automatically
evaluate the plans and generate detailed plan
refinement instructions to guide the iterative
improvement. In the learning stage, we build a
better planner by fine-tuning with the plan cor-
pus or in-context learning with examples in the
plan corpus. Finally, we leverage a hierarchi-
cal approach to generate long-form narratives.
We evaluate the effectiveness of EIPE-text in
the domains of novels and storytelling. Both
GPT-4-based evaluations and human evalua-
tions demonstrate that our method can generate
more coherent and relevant long-form narra-
tives. Our code will be released in the future.
1 Introduction
Large language models have made impressive
strides in text generation, performing well in tasks
such as machine translation, summarization, and
chat (Chang et al., 2023)(Bubeck et al., 2023).
However, generating long-form narrative remains a
∗Equal contribution
†Work done during internship at Microsoft Research Asia.
‡Corresponding author: wenswu@microsoft.comchallenging task, especially when it comes to main-
taining coherence over long ranges and ensuring
relevance to an initial premise. This is particularly
crucial for applications such as scriptwriting, nov-
els, business reports, journalism, among others.
Human writers often create a plan or out-
line before beginning to write a narrative, which
helps maintain a coherent and logical progression
throughout the narrative. Inspired by this, a hierar-
chical generation approach has been used in many
works, such as Re3(Yang et al., 2022), DOC(Yang
et al., 2023), and recurrentGPT(Zhou et al., 2023).
These works mainly focus on how to generate the
full narrative based on a plan and only generate the
plan by simply prompting a large language model.
However, the planning ability of LLMs is not good
enough and requires significant prompting engi-
neering work. Additionally, it is challenging to
adapt these models to a specific domain or style of
long-form narrative.
To address these limitations, we propose the
Evaluation-Guided Iterative Plan Extraction for
Long-Form Narrative Text Generation (EIPE-text)
framework. EIPE-text leverages a learned plan-
ner with enhanced domain expertise to generate a
high-quality plan, as illustrated in figure 1. Specif-
ically, EIPE-text consists of three stages: plan ex-
traction, learning, and inference. In the plan extrac-
tion stage, we iteratively extract and improve plans
from collected narrative corpus to construct a plan
corpus for planner learning. To evaluate the qual-
ity of extracted plans and the alignment between
plans and source narratives, we adopt a QA-based
self-evaluation mechanism, leveraging the reading
comprehension capabilities of LLMs. Based on
evaluation results, we generate detailed refinement
instructions to iteratively improve the plan. In the
learning stage, we build a better planner by fine-
tuning with the plan corpus or in-context learning
with examples in the plan corpus, which enhances
the ability to generate high-quality plans. DuringarXiv:2310.08185v1  [cs.CL]  12 Oct 2023

--- PAGE 2 ---
Plan Corpus
Generated Plan
Narrative 
GenerationPlan GenerationLLMs
Topic Query
Generated Narrative
Source Narrative
Plan Sketching
 QA-pairs Generation
QA-pairs
QA-based EvaluationRefinement Instructions
Plan𝑻𝒊Updated 
Plan  𝑻𝒊+𝟏LLMs
A. Plan Extraction
 B. Learning
C. Inference
Extracted Plan
Plan Refinement
Plan  𝑻𝒊
Plan𝑻𝒊+𝟏
…Planner
Fine-Tuning In-context  
Learning🔥 ❄️
Planner
Learning
Figure 1: A Comprehensive Visual Overview of the EIPE-text Framework. ThePlan Extraction stage starts
with Plan Sketching , where an initial plan is generated using an LLM. Then, in the QA-pairs Generation step,
a set of QA-pairs is created to evaluate the plan. QA-based Evaluation step evaluates the plan through question
answering and generates refinement instructions. In the Plan Refinement step, it iteratively improves the plan based
on the instructions until it passes the evaluation. Plans are then used to construct a plan corpus for the planner in the
Learning stage. Finally, in the Inference stage, the planner generates a plan, and the narrative is generated from the
plan.
the inference stage, we first generate the plan and
then further generate narratives based on the plan.
We evaluated the effectiveness of EIPE-text in
the domain of novels and storytelling and found
that both the fine-tuning based and in-context learn-
ing based planners outperform the baselines. Hu-
man evaluation also shows that the results of EIPE-
text were more coherent and relevant than those of
current state-of-the-art models.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
•We propose a new framework, EIPE-text,
which automatically extracts high-quality
plans from narrative corpus and learns better
planners for long-form narrative text genera-
tion. This framework can be generalized to all
domains.
•We propose a QA-based evaluation method to
automatically evaluate plans and generate de-
tailed instructions to improve the plan basedon evaluation results. This QA-based evalu-
ation provides more specific and actionable
results than simply leveraging GPT to com-
pare two outputs or provide a score (Liu et al.,
2023).
•We demonstrate the effectiveness of our model
in the novel and storytelling domains, and we
will release the code for future research.
2 Method
Our methodology contains three stages: plan ex-
traction, learning, and inference. The entire pro-
cess is shown in figure 1. During the plan extrac-
tion phase, plans are extracted from each narrative
within the corpus. These extracted plans are then
compiled to construct the plan corpus. By relying
on the constructed planning corpus, planner can
learn to generate high-quality plans. In the infer-
ence stage planner generates a better plan and a

--- PAGE 3 ---
narrative will be generated from the plan.
The plan extraction stage contains plan sketch-
ing, QA-pairs generation, QA-based evaluation,
and plan refinement. Initially, we create a tree-
structured plan using the LLM in the plan sketching
step. Next, during the QA-pairs generation phase,
we generate a set of QA-pairs, with each pair corre-
sponding to a distinct part within the source narra-
tive. These QA-pairs serve as an evaluation metric
for the plan. The QA-based evaluation step eval-
uates the plan by question answering. For each
incorrect QA-pair, we generate corresponding in-
structions to modify the relevant part of the plan.
In the plan refinement step, we integrate these in-
structions received in previous steps to update the
plan. We repeat steps 3 and 4 until the extracted
plan passes the evaluation.
In the learning stage, We leverage the plan ex-
tracted in the first stage to train an LLM planner.
To achieve this, we utilize two strategies: finetun-
ing, as well as in-context learning. These strategies
contribute to generating high-quality plans for the
given topic.
The inference stage contains two steps: plan
generation and narrative generation. Firstly, the
planner takes the topic as input and generates a
corresponding plan. Secondly, the narrative will be
generated in the narrative generation step.
2.1 Plan Extraction
Formally, we have a corpus of narrative Cn=
{n1, n2, ..., n m}. The plan extraction stage ex-
tracts a plan pifor each narrative ni. The ex-
traction results are compiled to a plan corpus
Cp={p1, p2, ..., p m}. We illustrated the process
of plan extraction in algorithm 1.
Plan Sketching. For each narrative, we use LLM
to extract a tree-structured plan, which serves as
the plan sketch. The detailed LLM prompt can be
found in appendix A.1. The plan is in a tree struc-
ture and the content of each node is the summariza-
tion of the corresponding section, subsection, and
so forth. We show an example of a plan sketch in
figure 2.
QA-pairs Generation. For each narrative, we
generate a set of QA-pairs, with each pair corre-
sponding to a different segment of the narrative.
These QA-pairs can be utilized to evaluate whether
the plan includes all aspects of the narrative. Each
QA-pair is formulated as a multiple-choice prob-
lem, comprising one question, multiple candidateanswers, and multiple correct answer indices. The
number of QA-pairs is proportional to the length of
the narrative. To ensure the quality of the generated
QA-pairs, we employ another LLM to answer these
questions based on the original text, filtering out
any incorrectly answered pairs. The guidelines for
this process can be found in appendix A.2.
QA-base Evaluation. We evaluate a plan using
QA-pairs and provide detailed refinement instruc-
tions for refining the plan further. Specifically, we
utilize LLM to answer questions based on the plan.
For each incorrect question, we generate an instruc-
tion to modify the plan so that the question can be
correctly answered. The modification instruction
can be one of the following: (1) add, which inserts
a missing node into the plan; (2) modify , which
alters the content of a node; (3) adjust , which re-
locates a node to another level of the tree, thereby
altering the tree’s structure. Detailed refinement
instructions enable LLM to make precise improve-
ments to specific parts of the plan.
Plan Refinement. In this step, we incorporate
the instructions generated in the previous step to
improve the plan. Ideally, we should apply the
changes one by one. In order to improve efficiency,
we instruct the LLM to apply all instructions simul-
taneously. However, the refinement instructions
generated by LLM may not always address the
incorrect questions. Therefore, we iteratively per-
form the refinement instructions generation and
plan refinement steps until the new plan can pass
the QA-based evaluation. This process ensures that
the final plan has addressed all the identified errors
and meets the desired quality standards.
While LLM possesses a self-improving ability
and can refine the plan through simple prompting,
the quality of the improvement results may still
not be good enough or even worse. Our QA-based
evaluation, on the other hand, can identify specific
errors in the plan and provide refinement instruc-
tions in the form of instructions to enhance the
plan. This approach can achieve better refinement
performance.
2.2 Learning
During the learning phase, we implemented two
methods to enhance the performance of the planner:
the in-context learning method and the fine-tuning
method.
The in-context learning method improves the
planner by selecting representative demonstration

--- PAGE 4 ---
Algorithm 1: Plan Extraction Algorithm
Input : Cn={n1, n2, ..., n m}
Output : Cp={p1, p2, ..., p m}
1Cp←∅
2fori←1tomdo
3 p0
i←plan_sketching (ni)
4Cq←qa_pairs_generation (ni) ▷Cq={q1, q2, ..., q k}questions set
5 t←0 ▷ trefinement time step
6 while not pass_evaluation (pt
i,Cq)do
7 Ci←qa_based_evaluation (pt
i, ni,Cq)▷Ci={i1, i2, ..., i l}refinement instructions set
8 pt+1
i←plan_refinement (pt
i,Ci)
9 t←t+ 1
10 end
11 Cp← C p∪pt
i
12end
examples from the plan corpus. By selecting dif-
ferent demonstration examples, the fixed LLM can
quickly adapt to specific domains or styles.
On the other hand, the fine-tuning method can
further improve the planner’s ability by training it
on all plan corpus. This method leverages all the
data in the plan corpus and enables the planner to
adapt to multiple domains simultaneously.
2.3 Inference
The inference stage comprises two steps: plan gen-
eration and narrative generation.
Plan Generation. In this step, the planner takes
the chosen topic as input and produces a corre-
sponding plan. The planner constructs a well-
structured plan that outlines the key elements and
sections to be covered in the ensuing narrative.
Narrative Generation. The narrative is gener-
ated from the generated plan in this step. This nar-
rative seamlessly integrates the content outlined in
the plan, ensuring that the resulting narrative is not
only logically organized but also rich in detail and
context. The final narrative is a well-rounded piece
of long-form narrative that effectively conveys the
information related to the chosen topic.
2.4 Discussion
In this section, we will discuss how EIPE-text
works. Here is our analysis:
Letqbe the premise query. The probability of de-
sired output based on premise query p(n|q)could
be rewritten as
P(n|q) =P(p|q)P(n|p) (1)When plan pis of high quality, P(n|p)will be high.
So as P(p|q)increases, P(n|q)increases too. Our
framework EIPE-text actually increases P(p|q).
Besides, the process of plan refinement in fig-
ure 1 could be understood as Reinforcement Learn-
ing(RL), LLM gets observation from answering the
question, and then obtains refinement instructions
according to the true or false case. After obtaining
refinement instructions, LLM changes the original
state to the new state i.e. revise plan. After many
interactions with the "environment", the "state" will
be iterated to a suitable "state" that can be used to
improve P(p|q).
To practically exemplify the effectiveness of
EIPE-text, we conducted a case study of plan gener-
ation through in-context learning with one demon-
stration. A detailed exploration of this case is pro-
vided in the Appendix D.2 for interested readers.
3 Experiments
In this section, we compare EIPE-text in novels
and storytelling generation with the baselines. All
experiments show that EIPE-text is better than the
baselines, verifying the effectiveness of our frame-
work.
3.1 Setup
For plan extraction stage, we use Azure Openai
GPT-4 as our experimental LLM. And for infer-
ence stage, we use the planner to generate a plan
to further generate the narrative. It should be em-
phasized that we did not intentionally implement
the narrative generation, but modified it based on
recurrentGPT, as described in the appendix B.1.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Dataset Train Size Test Size Avg Length Max Length
TED Talk 2468 130 2078 9044
Novel 1292 120 3741 14493
Table 1: Comprehensive Dataset Information for TED Talk and Novel.
Novel genres Overall(human)
∼4500words Interesting Coherent Relevant
EIPE-text (in-context) 56.7 64.2 75.8
recurrentGPT 60.0 59.2 62.5
Table 2: Novel Human Evaluation Results. Pair-wise
comparison using human evaluation of EIPE-text with
recurrentGPT for 120 novels of different genres. Results
never mix numbers from different comparisons
Novel genres Overall(automatic)
∼4500words Interesting Coherent Relevant
EIPE-text (in-context) 55.0 84.2 92.5
recurrentGPT 58.3 65.8 84.2
Table 3: Novel GPT4 Evaluation Results. Pair-wise
comparison using GPT-4 evaluation of EIPE-text with
recurrentGPT for 120 novels of different genres. Results
never mix numbers from different comparisons
For all the settings mentioned in the following
section, unless special emphasis, they adhere to
the description provided above.
3.2 Novel
3.2.1 Dataset
Novels are long-form narratives that include intri-
cate plots, and rich character development. The
model needs to maintain consistency in plots and
character development and generate interesting sto-
ries. We use the data collected from Project Amer-
ican Literature1, Writing Prompts2and etc. Then
we aggregate a training dataset containing total
1292 stories. Besides, we collected 120 prompts as
a test set from Writing Prompts, which cover six
genres. The more information about this dataset is
shown in table 1.
3.2.2 Setting
EIPE-text (in-context) For learning stage, we
use the text-embedding-ada-002 , to obtain text em-
beddings of plan corpus. These embeddings will
1https://americanliterature.com/short-stories
2https://blog.reedsy.com/
creative-writing-prompts/then be utilized in conjunction with the k-means
algorithm for cluster purposes. We use k-means
getting 20 clustering centroids as demonstrations
to learn a planner and use the planner during com-
paring with baselines.
3.2.3 Baselines
recurrentGPT A language-based simulacra of
the recurrence mechanism in RNNs that uses
language-based components and defines a recur-
rent computation graph via prompt engineering.
It is worth mentioning that we are not directly
comparing with Re3 and DOC, because recurrent-
GPT is already way ahead of these methods.
3.2.4 Metric
Our evaluation employs a pairwise comparison met-
ric. We report results individually for each pairwise
comparison between EIPE-text and each baseline,
never mixing numbers from different comparisons
following Re3 (Yang et al., 2022). We show the
criteria as outlined in (Yang et al., 2023) for novel
as following:
•Interesting : An interesting novel captivates
the reader’s attention, engages them emotion-
ally, and holds their interest throughout.
•Coherent : A coherent novel follows a logi-
cal and consistent plot-line without significant
gaps or inconsistencies.
•Relevant : Faithful to the initial premise.
Automatic Evaluation For automatic evaluation,
we employed GPT-4 to assess various aspects of the
generated narrative. GPT-4 automatic evaluation
is highly affected by the order and unstable, so all
metrics are judged by GPT4 with a premise, afore-
mentioned criteria and two corresponding stories in
random order. We also use majority voting system
to evaluate each criterion of each pair. The evalu-
ation prompt for novel can be found in appendix
C.1.

--- PAGE 6 ---
setting A setting B A Win Ratio B Win Ratio
LLaMA raw planner EIPE-text (finetune) 6.2 93.8
GPT4 raw planner EIPE-text (in-context) 22.5 75.2
Table 4: TED Talk Automatic Evaluation Results. Pair-wise comparison using GPT-4 evaluation of EIPE-text with
baselines for 130 TED talk transcripts. Results in different comparisons are not comparable with each other.
Human Evaluation In order to ensure impartial
and high-quality evaluations, we collaborated with
third-party data annotators. Each generated data
pair, comprising novels A and B presented in ran-
dom order, underwent meticulous evaluation by
three distinct annotators. These annotators pos-
sess proficient English language skills and were
provided with explicit instructions to evaluate and
deliver judgments on the superiority between novel
A and novel B, or if they are indistinguishable,
specifically in relation to the aforementioned crite-
ria.
3.2.5 Result
We show the experiment results of novels in table
2 and table 3. As we can see from the table, EIPE-
text shows an advantage in coherence and relevance
in both human and automatic evaluation. Although
the human evaluation is less interesting (3.3%), the
improvement of coherence (5.0%) and relevance
(13.3%) are significant. The same trend can be
seen in automatic evaluation, it is less interesting
than recurrentGPT(3.3%), but coherent (18.4%)
and relevant (8.3%) are significantly higher. These
results indicate that EIPE-text improves the overall
quality of generated narrative, and also indicate
that automatic evaluation and human evaluation
have certain relevance.
3.3 Strorytelling
3.3.1 Dataset
TED Talks3are influential presentations that cover
a wide range of topics. They are known for their en-
gaging narratives, concise structure, and powerful
messages, which can be challenging to generate for
both models and humans. We use the data collected
by Kaggle4. The training dataset aggregates 2,468
TED Talks spanning the years 1984 to 2016. In
addition, we have curated 130 TED Talk transcripts
post-2021 as our testing datasets as shown in table
1.
3https://www.ted.com/talks
4https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/rounakbanik/
ted-talks3.3.2 Setting
EIPE-text (in-context) For learning stage, text
embeddings obtained using text-embeddings-ada-
002 are used for clustering together with the k-
means algorithm. Then we use 20 clustering cen-
troids as demonstrations to learn a planner.
EIPE-text (finetune) We finetune the open
source LLM, LLaMA (Touvron et al., 2023), using
the plan corpus and use it as planner during learn-
ing stage. Specially, we finetune LLaMA-7B using
lora(Hu et al., 2022).
3.3.3 Baselines
GPT4 raw planner In this setup, planner is
GPT4 zero-shot whose ability to plan depends en-
tirely on its native capabilities. After the planner
generates the plan, narrative generation follows the
same way as the inference stage in 3.1
LLaMA raw planner similar to GPT4 raw plan-
ner, but the planner is untrained LLaMA.
3.3.4 Metric
We only adopt automatic evaluation in storytelling
generation. The evaluation criteria were tailored to
specific domain to ensure relevant and accurate as-
sessments, so we use other criteria for storytelling:
•Coherent : The talk should have a clear struc-
ture, smooth transitions, and a strong conclu-
sion for easy comprehension and a consistent
theme.
•Interesting : It should use storytelling and
examples to engage the audience, maintaining
their curiosity throughout.
•Relevant : The topic should be timely, address
current issues, and offer fresh insights, not
just repeat existing information.
•Inspiring : The talk should convey passion,
present innovative ideas, and encourage the
audience to think differently or take action.

--- PAGE 7 ---
It should be emphasized that we only use ma-
jority voting system to evaluate each pair for all
criteria, instead of evaluating each criterion of each
pair. The evaluation prompt for storytelling can be
found in appendix C.2
3.3.5 Results
We show the experiment result of storytelling do-
main on TED Talk in table 4. Under the finetune
setting, EIPE-text far outperforms LLaMA raw
planner (87.6%). Also under setting B, EIPE-text
is significantly outperform the GPT4 raw planner
(52.7%). EIPE-text either using a finetune base
planner or using in-context learning based planners
is well ahead of the LLM itself.
4 Analysis
In this section, we explore the key aspects of de-
signing an effective planner and provide an exper-
imental analysis of the effectiveness of the plan
refinement process.
4.1 Ablation study of in-context learning
based planner
Our investigation centers around two fundamental
questions: (1) How does the demonstration selec-
tion algorithm impact the performance of our plan-
ner? (2) What effect does the number of demonstra-
tion examples have on the planner’s performance?
To address these questions, we designed experi-
ments where we compared various planner config-
urations, including (1) n-shot cluster-based plan-
ner: this configuration utilizes a cluster-based ap-
proach to select n demonstration examples. (2)
n-shot retrieval-based planner : in contrast, this
configuration employs a retrieval-based method to
select n demonstration examples.
Using clustering to select more demonstra-
tions leads to better results. We show the results
in table 5. In the comparison between the 20-shot
cluster-based planner and the 5-shot cluster-based
planner, the 20-shot cluster-based planner outper-
forms the 5-shot cluster-based planner with a win
ratio of 70.9% versus 26.8%. This suggests that
using more demonstration examples leads to bet-
ter planner performance. In addition, as the plan
length we use is shorter than full narrative, we can
use more plans as demonstrations within context
window. When comparing the 5-shot cluster-based
planner and the 5-shot retrieval-based planner, the
clustering-based method for selecting demonstra-
tion examples appears to be slightly more effective.This trend is more pronounced when looking at the
comparison between the 20-shot cluster-based plan-
ner and the 20-shot retrieval-based planner. The
20-shot cluster-based planner significantly outper-
forms the retrieval-based planner, with a win ratio
of 67.2% versus 32.0%. This suggests that using
clustering for selection is considerably more effec-
tive than relying on retrieval-based methods.
4.2 Comparison between hierarchical
generation and non-hierarchical
To investigate the impact of narrative genera-
tion methods on the performance of our planner,
we compared hierarchical generation with non-
hierarchical methods.
We experiment with non-hierarchical generation
including configurations: (1) 0-shot without plan-
ner: generate full narrative directly in one step.
(2)n-shot cluster-based without planner : select
n demonstrations using a cluster-based approach
and generate a full narrative using these demonstra-
tions. (3) n-shot retrieval-based without planner :
similar to previous setting, instead, we rely on a
retrieval-based approach to select demonstrations.
Hierarchical generation is effective compared
with non-hierarchical . We show the results in
table 5. The 0-shot planner, significantly outper-
forms 0-shot without planner, achieving a win ratio
of 76.7% versus 20.9%. Moreover, similar trends
can be found in 5-shot setting with 88.2% versus
11.0% and 70.6% versus 29.4%.
4.3 Effectiveness of the plan refinement
process
In addition, we also want to know whether self-
refinement can be effectively refined and the rea-
sons behind its convergence.
Fast Convergence with Self-Refinement We
can see from the table 6 that our framework can
converge in an average of 2.98 epochs, which is
actually very fast and it is hard to converge without
using self-refinement. The average accuracy curve
of iterative refinement process is shown in figure 3.
Iterative Plan Refinement Ensures Alignment
The refined plan contains three operations, we mon-
itor the number of three operations in the process.
In addition, since we organize the plan into a tree
structure, we also record the change in the number
of nodes in the tree and the change in the num-
ber of secondary nodes (children of the root node)
throughout the process. As can be seen from table

--- PAGE 8 ---
Figure 2: An Example of the Plan Refinement Process.
Figure 3: Average accuracy curve of iterative refinement
process.6, the average add, modify and adjust operations
occur 8.26 times, 3.22 times, and 2.25 times respec-
tively. The average number of nodes increase by
11.41. We can clearly see these changes in figure
2 (for more detail in appendix D.1). This indicates
that in plan refinement process, it does not simply
add nodes. Instead, it can accurately modify rel-
evant parts and adjust structure according to the
question answering. Thus, these three operations
ensure the alignment between the plan and the orig-
inal narrative.
4.4 Case study of in-context learning based
plan generation
Relying solely on comprehensive narratives for
learning can often lead to missing finer details. Nar-
ratives are typically dense with information, posing
challenges for models to pinpoint and retain crit-

--- PAGE 9 ---
A B A Win Ratio B Win Ratio
Different Demonstration Number
20-shot cluster-based planner 5-shot cluster-based planner 70.9 26.8
Different Demonstration Selection
5-shot cluster-based planner 5-shot retrieval-based planner 51.6 46.0
20-shot cluster-based planner 20-shot retrieval-based planner 67.2 32.0
Different Narrative Generation Method
0-shot planner 0-shot without planner 76.7 20.9
5-shot cluster-based planner 5-shot cluster-based without planner 88.2 11.0
5-shot retrieval-based planner 5-shot retrieval-based without planner 70.6 29.4
Table 5: Ablation Study Result. Different Demonstration Number : In the learning stage of EIPE-text, in-context
learning based planner use different numbers of demonstrations. Different Demonstration selection : In-context
learning based planner can implement different methods, such as clustering or retrieving items related to the input
topic, to select demonstrations. Different Narrative Generation Method : In addition to being able to generate
narratives using EIPE-text. Narrative can also be generated in one step by simply combining several narratives as
demonstrations without planner giving an input topic.
metricoperation difference before and after epochs and question numbers
add modify adjust all nodes secondary nodes average epoch average questions
num 8.26 3.22 2.25 11.41 0.25 2.98 35.71
Table 6: Iterative Refinement Metric
ical elements. Furthermore, methods that learn
from complete narratives are usually computation-
ally expensive and time demanding. On the other
hand, when using in-context learning with plans,
models can more adeptly identify and relate to rel-
evant information within each contextual segment.
This technique not only ensures that key details
aren’t overlooked but also streamlines the learning
process regarding the text’s semantic framework,
ultimately conserving computational resources. We
show an example of 1-shot in Appendix D.2, from
which we can see that the generated plan is not
only coherent but also retains the salient features
of the demonstration, while effectively addressing
the topic query.
5 Related Work
Long-form Narrative Text Generation As for
long-form narrative text generation, recent studies
tackle this from the following perspectives: ap-
pending the generated prefix to the encoder (Shao
et al., 2017), while newer models like (Guan et al.,
2021) focus on capturing sentence and discourse-
level coherence, and DiscoDVT by (Ji and Huang,
2021) leverages discrete variational Transformers
to enhance long-range coherence in generated texts.
Another type of work adopts the plan-and-write
strategy (Fan et al., 2018). In particular, there has
been extensive exploration of story planning (Yaoet al., 2019; Fan et al., 2019; Goldfarb-Tarrant et al.,
2020). A hierarchical story generation system with
recursive prompting and revision was proposed by
Yang et al. (2022). And the current state-of-the-art
work recurrentGPT (Zhou et al., 2023), which uses
large language model (LLM) such as ChatGPT
and uses natural language to simulate the Long
Short-Term Memory mechanism in an LSTM. The
current plan results from these methods are not sat-
isfactory. Instead, we use LLM to automatically
mine the plan and train a good planner to achieve
good results. Furthermore, from the plan to the full
text, our methods and theirs are complementary
and can be combined to achieve better results.
Human-AI Co-writing Human-AI co-writing
systems have been developing at the intersection of
NLP and human-computer interaction (HCI) fields,
such as Wordcraft (Yuan et al., 2022), TaleBrush
(Chung et al., 2022), CoAuthor (Lee et al., 2022)
and Dramatron (Mirowski et al., 2023). These
works explore the possibilities of using LLM as
a writing assistant to humans. Our work generates
an explicit plan, which can be easily provided for
human review and modification, making human-AI
co-writing easier.

--- PAGE 10 ---
6 Conclusions
EIPE-text represents a significant step forward in
the field of long-form narrative text generation, ad-
dressing the challenges of coherence and structure
over extended pieces of text. With its ability to
generate high-quality long-form narratives and aid
human writers, EIPE-text opens up new possibili-
ties for leveraging the capabilities of LLMs in cre-
ative and expressive writing tasks. Future research
could explore further applications and extensions
of EIPE-text in various domains, advancing the
state of the art in automated text generation.
7 Limitations
During plan extraction stage, the two steps of QA-
pairs generation and questions answering largely
depend on LLM’s own reasoning capability, so this
method can only produce ideal results on models
with strong reasoning capability (GPT4, Claude,
etc.). Otherwise, it may lead to the refinement
process failing to converge. Our framework is a
data-driven approach, so it does not improve the
OOD performance.
References
Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen El-
dan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Pe-
ter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg,
Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi, Marco Tulio Ribeiro,
and Yi Zhang. 2023. Sparks of artificial general in-
telligence: Early experiments with gpt-4.
Yupeng Chang, Xu Wang, Jindong Wang, Yuan Wu,
Linyi Yang, Kaijie Zhu, Hao Chen, Xiaoyuan Yi,
Cunxiang Wang, Yidong Wang, Wei Ye, Yue Zhang,
Yi Chang, Philip S. Yu, Qiang Yang, and Xing Xie.
2023. A survey on evaluation of large language mod-
els.
John Joon Young Chung, Wooseok Kim, Kang Min
Yoo, Hwaran Lee, Eytan Adar, and Minsuk Chang.
2022. Talebrush: sketching stories with generative
pretrained language models. In Proceedings of the
2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput-
ing Systems , pages 1–19.
Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. 2018.
Hierarchical neural story generation. In Proceedings
of the 56th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 889–898, Melbourne, Australia. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Angela Fan, Mike Lewis, and Yann Dauphin. 2019.
Strategies for structuring story generation. In Pro-
ceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Asso-ciation for Computational Linguistics , pages 2650–
2660, Florence, Italy. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Seraphina Goldfarb-Tarrant, Tuhin Chakrabarty, Ralph
Weischedel, and Nanyun Peng. 2020. Content plan-
ning for neural story generation with aristotelian
rescoring. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) , pages 4319–4338, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Jian Guan, Xiaoxi Mao, Changjie Fan, Zitao Liu, Wen-
biao Ding, and Minlie Huang. 2021. Long text gener-
ation by modeling sentence-level and discourse-level
coherence. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 6379–6393, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Edward J Hu, yelong shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-
Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu
Chen. 2022. LoRA: Low-rank adaptation of large
language models. In International Conference on
Learning Representations .
Haozhe Ji and Minlie Huang. 2021. DiscoDVT: Gener-
ating long text with discourse-aware discrete vari-
ational transformer. In Proceedings of the 2021
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing , pages 4208–4224, Online and
Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Mina Lee, Percy Liang, and Qian Yang. 2022. Coau-
thor: Designing a human-ai collaborative writing
dataset for exploring language model capabilities. In
Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems , pages 1–19.
Yang Liu, Dan Iter, Yichong Xu, Shuohang Wang,
Ruochen Xu, and Chenguang Zhu. 2023. Gpteval:
Nlg evaluation using gpt-4 with better human align-
ment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.16634 .
Piotr Mirowski, Kory W Mathewson, Jaylen Pittman,
and Richard Evans. 2023. Co-writing screenplays
and theatre scripts with language models: Evaluation
by industry professionals. In Proceedings of the 2023
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems , pages 1–34.
Yuanlong Shao, Stephan Gouws, Denny Britz, Anna
Goldie, Brian Strope, and Ray Kurzweil. 2017. Gen-
erating high-quality and informative conversation re-
sponses with sequence-to-sequence models. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2017 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 2210–
2219, Copenhagen, Denmark. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier
Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix,
Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal

--- PAGE 11 ---
Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard
Grave, and Guillaume Lample. 2023. Llama: Open
and efficient foundation language models.
Kevin Yang, Dan Klein, Nanyun Peng, and Yuandong
Tian. 2023. DOC: Improving long story coherence
with detailed outline control. In Proceedings of the
61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages
3378–3465, Toronto, Canada. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Kevin Yang, Yuandong Tian, Nanyun Peng, and Dan
Klein. 2022. Re3: Generating longer stories with
recursive reprompting and revision. In Proceedings
of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-
ural Language Processing , pages 4393–4479, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Lili Yao, Nanyun Peng, Ralph Weischedel, Kevin
Knight, Dongyan Zhao, and Rui Yan. 2019. Plan-
and-write: Towards better automatic storytelling. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence , volume 33, pages 7378–7385.
Ann Yuan, Andy Coenen, Emily Reif, and Daphne Ip-
polito. 2022. Wordcraft: story writing with large
language models. In 27th International Conference
on Intelligent User Interfaces , pages 841–852.
Wangchunshu Zhou, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, Peng Cui,
Tiannan Wang, Zhenxin Xiao, Yifan Hou, Ryan Cot-
terell, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2023. Recurrentgpt:
Interactive generation of (arbitrarily) long text.
A Prompts
A.1 Prompt of Sketching Plan
Distill the salient information and thematic flow
from the original article into a tree-like text repre-
sentation of a mind map in the following format:
TOPIC
- Main Topic
- Sub Topic
- Sub-Sub Topic
- Sub-Sub Topic
...
- Main Topic
- Sub Topic
- Sub Topic
A.2 Prompt of QA-pairs Generation
Guideline
Based on the content of the article, generate sev-
eral multiple-choice questions and corresponding
answers:
1. Not too detailed2. Focus on the logic of the article
3.Deep understanding of the article after answer-
ing these questions
4.Each question must have 4 options: A, B, C,
D.
5.For each question, there might be more than
one correct answer, identify all correct an-
swers separated by ";"
6.Questions should reflect the structure of the
article.
7.Questions should include three types: what,
why, how.
8.Provide related main ideas in the article for
each question.
9.Avoid options like "All of the above" or "None
of the above"; use "A;B;C" format.
These questions are generated based on the article’s
content and the author’s opinion, not my opinion.
B Experiment Details
B.1 Modification for recurrentGPT
The way to improve recurrentGPT. recurrentGPT is
prone to loss of global memory just as RNN. And
we also find that the long-term memory in recur-
rentGPT is not exactly long-term memory. To com-
pensate for this, we can insert the generated plan
as additional memory to recurrentGPT, as shown
in figure 4. At each time step (’t’), recurrentGPT
operates on a dual input system: the paragraph
produced in the preceding step and a concise yet
directive instruction for the subsequent paragraph.
A crucial aspect is the integration of the model’s
long-term memory, which acts as a repository for
storing previously generated summaries, and im-
portantly, it can retrieve these summaries through
semantic search, with the ability to store them on
external hard drives. Simultaneously, the system ac-
tively maintains a short-term memory, responsible
for encapsulating key information from recent time
steps, a repository that gets updated consistently
as the process unfolds. Crucially, the "generated
plan," a newly introduced memory, becomes an
integral part of this intricate orchestration. When
the components converge, they create a coherent
prompt that triggers the backbone language model,
aptly dubbed the "backbone LLM," to undertake its

--- PAGE 12 ---
Figure 4: Illustration of the improvement of recurrent-
GPT. recurrentGPT uses natural language simulating an
LSTM, we insert additional memory to main the long-
term memory in LSTM
primary task: generating a fresh paragraph while
simultaneously outlining a succinct plan for the
forthcoming paragraph. What’s truly remarkable
is how this "generated plan" seamlessly merges
with the process, as it is not only updated in each
time step but also contributes to enriching the long-
term memory. This meticulous integration ensures
continuity and coherence throughout the sequence,
forging a recurrent mechanism that drives the gener-
ation process forward, where the "generated plan"
plays a pivotal role in shaping the narrative’s devel-
opment.
B.2 Use K-Means Get Demonstrations
Using text-embeddings-ada-002 directly to convert
a text format plan to embedding for clustering is
not varied. We have adopted a combination ap-
proach of K-means and LLM. To be specific, we
use LLM, according to prompt "Without loss of
generality, list distinctive characteristics of this ex-
emplar that establish it as an effective paradigm
for designing genre. no explanation is needed." to
get characteristics of plans. Then these characteris-
tics are converted into embedding before clustering.
After we set the number of clusters k, we can get
k clustering centers, and we use these centroid as
final demonstrations.
C Automatic Evaluation
C.1 Novel Automatic Evaluation
In this task, you will be presented with two novels
side-by-side and asked to evaluate them based on
three metrics: Coherence, Interestingness, Rele-vance. Your task is to determine which novel is
better for each metric or indicate if both novels are
indistinguishable.
- Coherent: A coherent novel follows a logical
and consistent plot-line without significant gaps or
inconsistencies.
- Interesting: An interesting novel captivates the
reader’s attention, engages them emotionally, and
holds their interest throughout.
- Relevant. Faithful to the initial premise. The
novel effectively aligns its plot, message, and writ-
ing with its initial premise, ensuring consistency
and faithfulness to the core theme.
Based on these three aspects, make a decision
on which novel is achieving the desired impact, in
the manner like this:
[Scratch Pad]
Name:
‘distinctive characteristics‘ and ‘elaborate‘ on
them
Name:
‘distinctive characteristics‘ and ‘elaborate‘ on
them
[Reflection]
After evaluating both novels based on the crite-
ria of ‘coherence‘, ‘interestingness‘, ‘relevance‘, I
have come to the following ‘thorough‘ conclusions:
- Coherence:
- Interestingness:
- Relevance:
[Final Choice]:
Coherence: Name;
Interestingness: Name;
Relevance: Name;
C.2 TED Talks Automatic Evaluation
The coach’s preference for evaluating the TED
Talks can be summarized in the following spec:
- Coherence: The coach will assess how well
the TED Talk is structured and organized. This
includes a clear introduction, logical flow of ideas,
smooth transitions between points, and a strong
conclusion. The talk should be easy to follow and
understand, with a consistent theme throughout.
- Interestingness: The coach will evaluate how
engaging and captivating the TED Talk is for the
audience. This includes the use of storytelling,
anecdotes, and examples to illustrate points, as well
as the speaker’s ability to maintain the audience’s
attention and curiosity throughout the talk.
- Relevance: The coach will consider the impor-
tance and significance of the topic being discussed

--- PAGE 13 ---
in the TED Talk. The subject matter should be
timely, relevant to current events or societal issues,
and have a broad appeal to a diverse audience. The
talk should also provide new insights or perspec-
tives on the topic, rather than simply rehashing
existing information.
- Inspiration: The coach will assess the TED
Talk’s ability to inspire, motivate, and provoke
thought in the audience. This includes the speaker’s
ability to convey passion and enthusiasm for the
topic, as well as the presentation of innovative
ideas, solutions, or calls to action that encourage
the audience to think differently or take action in
their own lives.
Based on these four aspects, the coach will make
a decision on which TED Talk is stronger and more
effective in achieving the desired impact on the
audience, in the manner like this:
[Scratch Pad]
Name:
‘distinctive characteristics‘ and ‘elaborate‘ on
them
Name:
‘distinctive characteristics‘ and ‘elaborate‘ on
them
[Reflection]
After evaluating both TED Talks based on the cri-
teria of ‘coherence‘, ‘interestingness‘, ‘relevance‘,
and ‘inspiration‘, I have come to the following
‘thorough‘ conclusions:
- Coherence:
- Interestingness:
- Relevance:
- Inspiration:
[Final Choice]: Name
D Examples
D.1 Plan Extraction Example
In this section, we show the detailed process of an
iteration in the plan extraction stage in the figure 5.
And the comparison of initialized plans and refined
plans are also shown in figure 6, 7, 8
D.2 Plan Generation Example
In figure 9, we observe several salient aspects of
the demonstration on the left side: 1. the utiliza-
tion of relatable examples and analogies. 2. the
connection of various disciplines and concepts. 3.
the incorporation of quotes from notable figures.
These attributes are integrated into the generatedplan. Notably, the generated plan contains relat-
able examples to substantiate its viewpoints and
incorporates relevant quotes. When we transition
to the generated plan on the right, it’s evident that
the plan incorporates these attributes seamlessly.
For instance: 1. the mention of "Daniel Kahne-
man’s System 1 and System 2 thinking" in the plan
mirrors the demonstration’s theme on "Human per-
ception and understanding.". 2. the outcome’s
emphasis on quotes is reflective of the demonstra-
tion’s approach, incorporating wisdom from Peter
Drucker and Tim Ferriss. We can observe that the
generated plan not only maintains coherence but
also preserves the key features of the demonstra-
tion, while effectively responding to the topic query.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Initialized  Plan  
 
Pig Products in Daily Life  
  - Introduction  
      - Netherlands: 16 million people, 12 million pigs  
      - Research on pig usage in products  
  - Products containing pig parts  
      - Bathroom items  
          - Soap (fatty acids from pork bone fat)  
          - Shampoo, conditioner, anti -wrinkle cream, body lotion, toothpaste  
      - Food items  
          - Dough improver (proteins from pig hairs)  
          - Low-fat butter (gelatin for texture)  
          - Cheesecake, chocolate mousse, tiramisu, vanilla pudding (gelatin for appearance)  
      - Construction materials  
          - Cellular concrete (proteins from bones)  
          - Train brakes (bone ash)  
      - Household items  
          - Fine bone china (translucency and strength)  
          - Paint (texture and glossiness)  
          - Sandpaper (bone glue)  
          - Paintbrushes (pig hairs)  
      - Meat products  
          - Portion -controlled meat cuts (fibrin from pig blood)  
      - Beverages  
          - Beer, wine, fruit juice (gelatin for clarity)  
      - Other products  
          - Cigarettes with hemoglobin filters  
          - Injectable collagen for wrinkles  
          - Bullets  
          - Heart valve implants  
          - Renewable energy (fuel from unused pig parts)  
  - Conclusion  
      - 185 products found containing pig parts  
      - Importance of knowing what products are made of  
      - Taking better care of raw materials and producers  
 

--- PAGE 15 ---
QA-based  evaluation  
 
Question  1: Why does soap contain fatty acids made from boiling pork bone fat?  
• A. To harden the soap  
• B. To give it a pearl -like effect  
• C. To make it smell better  
• D. To improve its cleaning ability  
Answer  1: A; B  
Wrong  Answer  1: A 
Reference  1: "Level 4 node 'Soap (fatty acids from pork bone fat)'"  
 
Question  2: What is the purpose of using pig hemoglobin in cigarette filters?  
• A. To create an artificial lung  
• B. To improve the taste of the cigarette  
• C. To make the cigarette burn slower  
• D. To reduce the amount of harmful chemicals  
Answer  2: A 
Wrong  Answer  2: D 
Reference  2: "Level 4 node 'Cigarettes with hemoglobin filters'"  
 
Question  3: What is the purpose of using pig proteins in cellular concrete?  
• A. To strengthen the concrete  
• B. To make the concrete lighter  
• C. To improve the concrete's heat resistance  
• D. To increase the concrete's elasticity  

--- PAGE 16 ---
Answer  3: B 
Wrong  Answer  3: A 
Reference  3: "Level 4 node 'Cellular concrete (proteins from bones)'"  
 
Question  4: Why did the director of the heart valve company not want their product to be 
associated with pigs?  
• A. Because pigs are considered unclean animals  
• B. Because it would reduce the perceived value of the product  
• C. Because they were concerned about potential religious objections  
• D. Because they wanted to maintain the high -tech image of the product  
Answer  4: D 
Wrong  Answer  4: C 
Reference  4: "Level 4 node 'Heart valve implants'"  
 
Question:  How are pig -derived ingredients used in renewable energy?  
• A. As a substitute for fossil fuels  
• B. In the production of solar panels  
• C. In the production of wind turbines  
• D. As a source of biofuel  
Answer:  D 
Wrong  Answer:  A 
Reference:  "Level 4 node 'Renewable energy (fuel from unused pig parts)'"  
 
 
Refinement  Instructions  
 

--- PAGE 17 ---
     
 Instruction : "Add a new level 5 node 'Hardening agent and pearl -like effect' under level 
4 node 'Soap (fatty acids from pork bone fat)', as the first level 5 node"  
        
Instruction : "Add a new level 5 node 'Creates an artificial lung in the filter for a 
healthier cigarette' under level 4 node 'Cigarettes with hemoglobin filters', as the first 
level 5 node"  
 
Instruction : "Add a new level 5 node 'Lightweight and fully reusable' under level 4 node 
'Cellular concrete (proteins from bones)', as the first level 5 node"  
 
Instruction : "Add a new level 5 node 'Director did not want the product associated with 
pigs to maintain its high -tech image' under level 4 node 'Heart valve implants', as the first 
level 5 node"  
 
Instruction : "Change the name of level 4 node 'Renewable energy (fuel from unused pig 
parts)' to 'Renewable energy (fuel from pig waste)'; Add a new level 5 node 'Pig waste is 
converted into fuel for renewable energy' under level 4 node 'Renewable energy (fuel 
from p ig waste)'"  
 
 
Refine plan  
Pig Products in Daily Life  
  - Introduction  
      - Netherlands: 16 million people, 12 million pigs  
      - Research on pig usage in products  
  - Products containing pig parts  
      - Bathroom items  
          - Soap (fatty acids from pork bone fat)  
              - Hardening agent and pearl -like effect  
          - Shampoo, conditioner, anti -wrinkle cream, body lotion, toothpaste  
      - Food items  
          - Dough improver (proteins from pig hairs)  
          - Low-fat butter (gelatin for texture)  
          - Cheesecake, chocolate mousse, tiramisu, vanilla pudding (gelatin for appearance)  
      - Construction materials  
          - Cellular concrete (proteins from bones)  

--- PAGE 18 ---
              - Lightweight and fully reusable  
          - Train brakes (bone ash)  
      - Household items  
          - Fine bone china (translucency and strength)  
          - Paint (texture and glossiness)  
          - Sandpaper (bone glue)  
          - Paintbrushes (pig hairs)  
      - Meat products  
          - Portion -controlled meat cuts (fibrin from pig blood)  
      - Beverages  
          - Beer, wine, fruit juice (gelatin for clarity)  
      - Other products  
          - Cigarettes with hemoglobin filters  
              - Creates an artificial lung in the filter for a healthier cigarette  
          - Injectable collagen for wrinkles  
          - Bullets  
          - Heart valve implants  
              - Director did not want the product associated with pigs to  maintain its high -tech 
image  
          - Renewable energy (fuel from unused pig parts)  
  - Conclusion  
      - 185 products found containing pig parts  
      - Importance of knowing what products are made of  
      - Taking better care of raw materials and producers  
 Figure 5: The detailed process of an iteration in the plan extraction stage

--- PAGE 19 ---
Figure 6: Topic: This is your brain on communication . Neuroscientist Uri Hasson researches the basis of human
communication, and experiments from his lab reveal that even across different languages, our brains show similar
activity, or become äligned, ¨when we hear the same idea or story. This amazing neural mechanism allows us to
transmit brain patterns, sharing memories and knowledge. ¨We can communicate because we have a common code
that presents meaning, ¨Hasson says.

--- PAGE 20 ---
Figure 7: Topic: Discover the physical side of the internet . When a squirrel chewed through a cable and knocked
him offline, journalist Andrew Blum started wondering what the Internet was really made of. So he set out to go see
it – the underwater cables, secret switches and other physical bits that make up the net.

--- PAGE 21 ---
Figure 8: Topic: Growing new organs . Anthony Atala’s state-of-the-art lab grows human organs – from muscles
to blood vessels to bladders, and more. At TEDMED, he shows footage of his bio-engineers working with some of
its sci-fi gizmos, including an oven-like bioreactor (preheat to 98.6 F) and a machine that ¨prints ¨human tissue.

--- PAGE 22 ---
Figure 9: Example of one shot.
