# 2310.10996.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: ./2310.10996.pdf
# File size: 1590537 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
ClarifyGPT: Empowering LLM-based Code Generation with
Intention Clarification
FANGWEN MU∗,Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
LIN SHI∗,Beihang University, China
SONG WANG, York University, Canada
ZHUOHAO YU, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
BINQUAN ZHANG, Beihang University, China
CHENXUE WANG, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
SHICHAO LIU, Software IDE innovation Lab, Huawei Central Software Institute, China
QING WANG, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
Large Language Models (LLMs), such as ChatGPT, have demonstrated impressive capabilities in automatically
generating code from provided natural language requirements. However, in real-world practice, it is inevitable
that the requirements written by users might be ambiguous or insufficient. Current LLMs will directly generate
programs according to those unclear requirements regardless of interactive clarification, which will likely
deviate from the origin user intents. To bridge that gap, we introduce a novel framework named ClarifyGPT ,
which aims to enhance code generation by empowering LLMs with the ability to identify ambiguous re-
quirements and ask targeted clarifying questions. In particular, ClarifyGPT first detects whether a given
requirement is ambiguous by performing a code consistency check. If it is ambiguous, ClarifyGPT prompts
an LLM to generate targeted clarifying questions. After receiving question responses, ClarifyGPT refines the
ambiguous requirement and inputs it into the same LLM to generate a final code solution. To evaluate our
ClarifyGPT , we first conduct a human evaluation involving ten participants who use ClarifyGPT for code
generation on two publicly available benchmarks: MBPP-sanitized and MBPP-ET. The results show that Clar-
ifyGPT elevates the performance (Pass@1) of GPT-4 from 70.96% to 80.80% on MBPP-sanitized. Furthermore,
to perform large-scale automated evaluations of ClarifyGPT across different LLMs and benchmarks without
requiring user participation, we introduce a high-fidelity simulation method to simulate user responses. The
automated evaluation results also demonstrate that ClarifyGPT can significantly enhance code generation
performance compared to the baselines. In particular, ClarifyGPT improves the average performance of
GPT-4 and ChatGPT across four benchmarks from 68.02% to 75.75% and from 58.55% to 67.22%, respectively. We
believe that ClarifyGPT can effectively facilitate the practical application of LLMs in real-world development
environments.
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research
Authors’ addresses: Fangwen Mu, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, fangwen2020@iscas.
ac.cn; Lin Shi, Beihang University, Beijing, China, shilin@buaa.edu.cn; Song Wang, York University, Toronto, Canada,
wangsong@yorku.ca; Zhuohao Yu, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, yuzhuohao23@
mails.ucas.edu.cn; Binquan Zhang, Beihang University, Beijing, China, binquan@buaa.edu.cn; ChenXue Wang, Institute of
Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, chenxuew02@gmail.com; Shichao Liu, Software IDE innovation Lab,
Huawei Central Software Institute, Beijing, China, liushichao2@huawei.com; Qing Wang, Institute of Software, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, wq@iscas.ac.cn.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored.
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
©2023 Association for Computing Machinery.
XXXX-XXXX/2023/10-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.arXiv:2310.10996v1  [cs.SE]  17 Oct 2023

--- PAGE 2 ---
2 Fangwen Mu, Lin Shi, Song Wang, Zhuohao Yu, Binquan Zhang, ChenXue Wang, Shichao Liu, and Qing Wang
ACM Reference Format:
Fangwen Mu, Lin Shi, Song Wang, Zhuohao Yu, Binquan Zhang, ChenXue Wang, Shichao Liu, and Qing Wang.
2023. ClarifyGPT: Empowering LLM-based Code Generation with Intention Clarification. 1, 1 (October 2023),
21 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 INTRODUCTION
Code generation aims to produce a code snippet that satisfies the user’s intent expressed in a natural
language requirement. This task, which offers potential cost savings, accelerates programming
activities, and facilitates software development, has consequently garnered attention across various
domains, e.g., natural language processing, artificial intelligence, and software engineering. Recent
efforts tackle this task by leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs) with billions of parameters,
such as ChatGPT[ 34] and CodeGen[ 33]. The LLMs take the natural language requirements (i.e.,
prompts) as inputs and output the corresponding code snippets, achieving remarkable progress in
code generation.
However, in real-world practice, due to the diversity of user experience and perspective, it is
inevitable that the requirements written by users might be ambiguous or insufficient. For example,
the requirement "Write a function to sort a list of elements" does not specify whether the user
intends for the list to be sorted in ascending or descending order. Current LLMs do not handle
such ambiguous requirements: they rarely ask users to clarify these requirements and instead
directly generate programs that may deviate from the users’ needs [ 21]. Current LLMs-based
code generation approaches lack the mechanism of clarifying unclear requirements [ 20,21], i.e.,
they directly generate programs according to those unclear requirements regardless of interactive
clarification. In contrast, when human developers encounter ambiguous requirements, they typically
seek additional information by interactively asking clarifying questions to the users. For the above
example, a simple clarifying question such as "Should the sorting be in ascending or descending
order?" could help disambiguate the requirement.
In light of this observation, we argue that empowering LLMs with the ability to automatically
ask clarifying questions for ambiguous requirements is necessary for improving the quality and
efficiency of code generation. However, it is quite challenging to empower LLMs with this ability
due to the following barriers. (1) When to Ask Clarifying Questions? In practical development
environments, numerous requirements exist, including both ambiguous and unambiguous ones.
Failure to concentrate on questioning only the ambiguous requirements can lead to unnecessary
interactions between LLMs and users regarding well-defined requirements. These unnecessary
interactions, in turn, can diminish efficiency and compromise the user experience. (2) What
Clarifying Questions Should be Asked? The quality of clarifying questions also influences
the efficiency and performance of code generation. Precisely and targeted questions aid users in
expressing their intents clearly, ensuring that the obtained responses are directly relevant to the
ambiguities present in the requirements. Vague or broad questions increase the risk of obtaining
off-topic or irrelevant responses, potentially hindering LLMs from comprehending user intents.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework called ClarifyGPT that enhances LLM-based
code generation via requirement clarification. First , we employ a two-step code consistency check
to decide when to ask clarifying questions. We are motivated by the observation that feeding
a clear requirement to LLMs usually results in generating diverse code snippets that behave
consistently, i.e., given the same test inputs, those different code snippets will likely return the same
outputs. While feeding an unclear requirement, LLMs are likely to generate diverse code snippets
that behave differently. Specifically, in the first step, ClarifyGPT aims to generate numerous
high-quality test inputs for a given requirement via type-aware mutation. In the second step,
ClarifyGPT inputs the given requirement into an LLM to sample 𝑛code solutions and checks
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 3 ---
ClarifyGPT: Empowering LLM-based Code Generation with Intention Clarification 3
whether they produce identical outputs when tested with the generated input. If the outputs are
not identical, ClarifyGPT determines that the requirement requires further clarification; and vice
versa. Second , we employ the reasoning-based prompting for generating clarification questions.
Initially, ClarifyGPT directs LLMs to analyze the factors contributing to the ambiguity of the
given requirement by comparing code solutions with different functionalities. Subsequently, it
formulates targeted clarifying questions based on the results of this analysis. By comparing these
different code implementations, potential points of ambiguity in the requirements can be readily
identified. After detecting the points of ambiguity in the requirements, the LLMs can generate
targeted clarifying questions for them. Finally ,ClarifyGPT refines the original requirement based
on the generated questions and their responses and generates the final code solution.
To assess the effectiveness of ClarifyGPT , we first integrate GPT-4 [ 35] into ClarifyGPT and
recruit ten participants to evaluate its performance on two public benchmarks (MBPP-sanitized [ 4],
and MBPP-ET [ 10]). The human evaluation results show that ClarifyGPT elevates the performance
(Pass@1) of GPT-4 on MBPP-sanitized from 70.96% to 80.8%, improves the performance (Pass@1)
of ChatGPT on MBPP-ET from 51.52% to 60.19%. Besides, due to requiring the involvement of
human participants, evaluating ClarifyGPT could be very expensive and hard to reproduce. To
perform automated evaluations of ClarifyGPT across different LLMs and benchmarks without
requiring user participation, we introduce a high-fidelity simulation method to simulate user
feedback. We then conduct comprehensive experiments on four benchmarks (HumanEval [ 8],
HumanEval-ET [ 10], MBPP-sanitized, and MBPP-ET) using two state-of-the-art LLMs (i.e., GPT-4
and ChatGPT). The results demonstrate that, in comparison with the default GPT-4, ClarifyGPT
achieves an average improvement of 11.52% across four benchmarks; in comparison with the default
ChatGPT, ClarifyGPT achieves an average improvement of 15.07% on four benchmarks. Our main
contributions are outlined as follows:
•Framework : We propose a novel framework, named ClarifyGPT , which enables LLMs to
detect ambiguous requirements and formulate targeted clarifying questions. ClarifyGPT
refines the ambiguous requirements based on the answers to clarifying questions and further
generates code solutions.
•User Simulation : We introduce a user simulation method for producing high-fidelity simu-
lated answers to the clarifying questions, which facilitates automated evaluations of Clar-
ifyGPT across different LLMs and benchmarks, eliminating the necessity for direct user
participation.
•Evaluation : We conduct extensive experiments on four widely-used benchmarks to show
that, ClarifyGPT achieves substantial improvements across different models and benchmarks.
A human evaluation further confirms the significant potential of applying ClarifyGPT in
real-world practice.
•Data : publicly accessible dataset and source code [ 1] to facilitate the replication of our study
and its application in extensive contexts.
In the rest of this paper, Section 2 introduces the background and related work. Section 3
elaborates our proposed framework ClarifyGPT . Section 4 presents the experimental setup. Section
5 illustrates the results and analysis. Section 6 discusses the benefits and limitations of ClarifyGPT
and threats to validity. Finally, Section 7 summarizes this work.
2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
2.1 LLM-based Code Generation
Code generation is a hot research topic for software engineering and artificial intelligence commu-
nities. Recently, many LLMs have been proposed for code generation. One class of models is the
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 4 ---
4 Fangwen Mu, Lin Shi, Song Wang, Zhuohao Yu, Binquan Zhang, ChenXue Wang, Shichao Liu, and Qing Wang
encoder-decoder models, e.g., PLBART [ 2], CodeT5 [ 45], and AlphaCode [ 27], which generally en-
code an input text into a context embedding and decode the embedding to a code solution. Another
class of models is the decoder-only models that are trained with the next token prediction objective
and generate code from left to right. GPT series models [ 5,8], PolyCoder [ 48], and InCoder [ 13] are
examples of such models. Among them, ChatGPT [ 34] and GPT-4 [ 35] are the state-of-the-art LLMs
developed by OpenAI. They have demonstrated improved understanding and reasoning abilities,
proficiency in comprehending the provided context, and the capacity to generate high-quality texts.
Since training or fine-tuning these LLMs is highly expensive, there has also been a lot of research
focused on enhancing the performance of LLMs in code generation with minimal or no fine-tuning.
Prompt Learning is one of the most important techniques for achieving this goal [ 11,28,31,40,47].
The Chain-of-Thought (CoT) [ 47] is a novel prompting engineering technique, which can elicit
LLMs to produce intermediate reasoning steps that lead to the final answer. It has shown impressive
performance in complex reasoning tasks (e.g., arithmetic and symbolic reasoning) [ 19,47], and has
therefore been applied to code generation [ 16,26]. Inspired by CoT, Li et al. [ 26] propose a new
prompting method, named Structured CoT (SCoT). Different from CoT, SCoT explicitly introduces
code structures and teaches LLMs to generate intermediate reasoning steps with program structures.
Jiang et al. [ 16] propose a self-planning approach that can guide LLMs to understand code planning
with few-shot demonstrations and write corresponding code planning for the given requirement.
The aforementioned studies focus on leveraging and augmenting the reasoning capabilities of LLMs,
that is, prompting LLMs to generate intermediate reasoning steps to enhance code generation
performance. Nevertheless, they remain insufficient in addressing the ambiguous requirements
provided by humans, as unclear user intent may mislead LLMs into producing incorrect reasoning
steps, thereby yielding inaccurate results. Our ClarifyGPT recognizes the importance of clarifying
ambiguous requirements and proposes a novel framework that enables LLMs to automatically detect
ambiguous requirements and ask targeted clarifying questions. By clarifying user requirements,
ClarifyGPT can generate code solutions that fulfill the user’s intentions. GPT-Engineer [ 36] is a
recent open-source Github repository. It utilizes manual-designed instructions to prompt LLMs
to ask clarifying questions for the input user requirements, and then generates code snippets
based on user feedback. However, GPT-Engineer asks clarifying questions for both ambiguous and
unambiguous requirements, which is detrimental to the user experience and may result in incorrect
code solutions1. While ClarifyGPT can detect ambiguous requirements by checking whether the
test outputs of sampled code solutions are identical. Furthermore, ClarifyGPT employs prompting
techniques to direct LLMs to first analyze the factors contributing to requirement ambiguity and
then formulate targeted questions.
2.2 Clarifying Question Generation
The task of generating clarifying questions for ambiguous queries or dialogues has received much
attention in information retrieval and dialogue system fields [ 9,18,20,30,37,41]. In terms of
information retrieval, many studies have pointed out that clarifying questions can help resolve
ambiguous queries and improve user experience. For example, Wang and Li [ 43] find that search
queries are often short and the underlying user intents are often ambiguous. They propose an
effective template-guided clarifying question generation model, which employs Transformer to
select a question template from a list of template candidates and fill in the question slot from a
slot vocabulary. Eberhart and McMillan [ 12] propose a novel method to ask clarifying questions
for query refinement, which utilizes a task extraction algorithm to identify query aspects and
follows a rule-based procedure to generate questions. In terms of the dialogue system domain, both
1https://github.com/AntonOsika/gpt-engineer/issues/708
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 5 ---
ClarifyGPT: Empowering LLM-based Code Generation with Intention Clarification 5
Fig. 1. The Overview of ClarifyGPT
rule-based and learning-based approaches have been proposed. Dhole [ 9] proposes a novel method
of generating discriminative questions by leveraging a simple rule-based system, which aims at
seeking clarification from the user, thereby reducing the roboticity of the conversation and making
the interaction considerably natural. Rao et al. [ 37] describe a method for generating clarifying
questions, which uses a seq2seq model to generate a question given a context and utilizes another
seq2seq model to generate an answer given the context and the question.
In code generation, dealing with ambiguous user requirements has received little attention so
far. To the best of our knowledge, Li et al. [ 25] is the only research paper that addresses ambiguous
requirements resolution for code generation. This work aims to clarify the ambiguous requirements
missing key operations, e.g., API calls. It first collects a dataset named Code ClarQA containing
natural language requirements, code, clarifying questions, and answers. Then, it proposes a code
generation pipeline that can select relevant clarifying questions and their answers from the dataset
for a given requirement for generating a code solution. However, the scope of applicability for this
work is limited. Firstly, it primarily focuses on clarifying operational-level ambiguities, leaving
other forms of ambiguity, such as semantic ambiguities in natural language requirements, less
effectively addressed. Furthermore, it heavily relies on the constructed dataset, retrieving relevant
questions for ambiguous requirements. If the dataset lacks similar requirements, the method’s
performance may suffer. Differing from this work, ClarifyGPT is not limited to a specific type of
ambiguous requirement clarification. And ClarifyGPT can generate precise and targeted questions
for various requirements by leveraging the powerful understanding ability of LLMs.
3 APPROACH
In this section, we introduce ClarifyGPT , a code generation framework for LLMs. Figure 1 illus-
trates the overview of ClarifyGPT , which consists of four main stages: (1) Test Input Generation
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 6 ---
6 Fangwen Mu, Lin Shi, Song Wang, Zhuohao Yu, Binquan Zhang, ChenXue Wang, Shichao Liu, and Qing Wang
Fig. 2. List of basic type-aware mutations over input 𝑥[29]
(Section 3.1), aiming at generating high-quality test inputs for a given requirement by using prompt-
ing techniques and heuristic mutations; (2) Code Consistency Check (Section 3.2), for leveraging
the generated test inputs to conduct a consistency evaluation, and then identifying the ambiguous
requirements; (3) Reasoning based question generation (Section 3.3), focused on generating
targeted clarifying questions for the identified ambiguous requirements by prompting LLMs to
engage in intermediate reasoning; (4) Enhanced Code Generation (Section 3.4), which incorpo-
rates the clarifying questions and their feedback to refine the original requirement and generate
the final code solution based on the refined prompt. Below, we provide details for each stage in
ClarifyGPT .
3.1 Test Input Generation
In this step, ClarifyGPT aims to produce high-quality test inputs to effectively distinguish between
code solutions with different functionalities. There are many studies have attempted to employ
LLMs for unit test case generation [ 24,38,42] and have demonstrated impressive performance.
Following prior work [ 29],ClarifyGPT leverages LLMs as the test input generator and generates
test inputs by adopting a two-step approach (i.e., seed input initialization and type-aware mutation).
Specifically, ClarifyGPT begins by designing a prompt to instruct an LLM in creating a set of
seed inputs. It then performs type-aware mutations to generate a large number of new inputs.
Our insights are: (1) on the one hand, since LLMs possess powerful understanding and reasoning
abilities, using them as test input generators can produce high-quality inputs that remain valid
even under semantic constraints. Take the example shown in Figure 4, the problem in HumanEval
requires the input string must contain balanced parentheses. Traditional input generators often
face challenges in ensuring compliance with such semantic constraints. (2) on the other hand, LLMs
are unsuitable for large amounts of automated test generation due to undesired speed and cost of
querying such large models [ 29]. Thus, we utilize a heuristic mutation-based method to accelerate
the generation of numerous test cases, ensuring both stability and reliability.
3.1.1 Seed Input Initialization. ClarifyGPT starts with designing a prompt for seed input initial-
ization. As shown in Figure 3 (a), the prompt consists of three parts: (1) an instruction, designed
to elicit LLMs to generate complex, difficult, and corner-case test inputs; (2) few-shot manually-
crafted demonstrations, including a user requirement and ground-truth test inputs, which can assist
LLMs in better understanding the task described in the instruction; (3) a query, for which LLMs
generate input tests for based on it. Specifically, we first finalize the prompt with the instruction,
demonstrations, and the given requirement. Then, ClarifyGPT utilizes the prompt to query LLMs
to generate seed inputs. Finally, we collect these generated seed inputs to initialize a seed pool that
will be used for mutation.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 7 ---
ClarifyGPT: Empowering LLM-based Code Generation with Intention Clarification 7
3.1.2 Type-Aware Input Mutation. After initializing a seed pool, ClarifyGPT employs a type-aware
input mutation strategy[ 29] to generate higher-quality test inputs. Specifically, our approach follows
the standard mutation-based fuzzing workflow [ 49,50]: (1) At each iteration, an input is randomly
selected from the seed pool. (2) For the selected input, we inspect its data types and perform a
single mutation operation consistent with its type to create a new test case. The basic mutations
used for different types of inputs are illustrated in Figure 2. For simple data types, such as intand
float, one mutation operation simply increases or decreases its value by 1. For compound types, we
mutate the elements based on their internal types. (3) After completing a round of mutations, we
add the newly generated inputs to the seed pool and repeat the aforementioned process until we
attain the desired number of generated inputs.
3.2 Code Consistency Check
A clear user requirement should be easy to understand and leave no room for interpretation, while
an ambiguous user requirement can lead to stakeholders interpreting it in different ways. Inspired
by this, we make an assumption that, for a given requirement, if an LLM generates numerous
code solutions with different functionalities, it signifies that the requirement can lead to the LLM
interpreting it in different ways. Consequently, such a requirement necessitates further clarification
and refinement. In light of this assumption, we propose a simple yet efficient method to determine
ambiguous requirements. First, we feed a given requirement into an LLM to sample 𝑛code solutions.
Then, these code solutions are executed with test inputs generated in the previous step. We obtain
the test outputs of these programs and compare the test outputs to inspect whether they are
identical. If the outputs are identical, ClarifyGPT considers these code solutions as interpreting
the requirement in the same way, thus identifying the requirement as unambiguous. In this case,
one of the sampled codes would be output as the final code solution. However, if the outputs
are not identical, ClarifyGPT believes the LLM has different understandings of this requirement
when it produces code solutions and identifies the requirement as ambiguous. For these ambiguous
requirements, as shown in Figure 1, we perform the code clustering to divide these code solutions
into several groups based on their test outputs. Subsequently, ClarifyGPT randomly chooses one
code solution from each group and feeds these inconsistent code solutions into the next component
to synthesize the prompt used for asking questions.
3.3 Reasoning Based Question Generation
Targeted clarifying questions facilitate users in articulating their intentions with clarity, ensuring
that the responses obtained are directly pertinent to the unclear parts within the requirements.
Vague or broad questions increase the risk of getting off-topic or irrelevant responses, which may
hurt the performance of code generation. Therefore, upon identifying ambiguous requirements, it
becomes essential to empower LLMs with the capability to craft precise and targeted questions. To
achieve this objective, we devise a reasoning-based prompt aimed at directing LLMs to initially
scrutinize the factors contributing to the ambiguity of the requirement and subsequently formulate
targeted questions grounded in the analysis. The designed prompt is depicted in Figure 3 (b). It
includes three parts: (1) an instruction, which describes the task (i.e., clarifying question generation)
we want the LLMs to solve; (2) few-shot <requirement, inconsistent solutions, clarifying questions>
triples as demonstrations, which help LLMs in understanding and solving the task; (3) a query,
containing a user requirement and its code solutions, which is fed to LLMs for generating questions.
Specifically, ClarifyGPT constructs the prompt to direct LLMs to analyze the factors contributing
to the unclear requirement by understanding the functionalities of these inconsistent code solutions
and comparing their disparities. The motivation is that, in software development, code solutions
represent the specific implementation of requirements. If a requirement is ambiguous, different
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 8 ---
8 Fangwen Mu, Lin Shi, Song Wang, Zhuohao Yu, Binquan Zhang, ChenXue Wang, Shichao Liu, and Qing Wang
Fig. 3. The details of the prompts used in ClarifyGPT
developers may have different interpretations and consequently write different code. Some of these
inconsistent code solutions are incorrect or not in line with the original intent. By comparing
these different code implementations, potential points of ambiguity in the requirements can be
easily identified. After detecting the points of ambiguity in the requirements, the LLMs continue to
generate targeted clarification questions based on the detection results.
Our proposed prompting shares a similar idea with the Chain of Thought (CoT) [ 47] prompting,
which elicits LLMs to generate intermediate reasoning steps (analysis of the factors contributing
to ambiguity) first, and then produce final results (targeted clarifying questions) based on these
intermediate reasoning steps. In this way, ClarifyGPT encourages LLMs to perform “far-ahead
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 9 ---
ClarifyGPT: Empowering LLM-based Code Generation with Intention Clarification 9
planning” [ 6], enabling them to better leverage their reasoning and comprehension abilities to
enhance the quality of the generated questions.
3.4 Enhanced Code Generation
Once user responses are captured, ClarifyGPT combines them with the generated questions to
refine the original requirement into a clear one. In particular, as shown in the query in Figure 3
(d), we pair each question and its corresponding answer to create a clarification, which are then
appended to the end of the docstring to form the refined requirement. By refining an ambiguous
requirement in this way, we can preserve the structural integrity of the docstring in the original
requirement while enhancing it with additional clarifying information. Subsequently, we use the
refined requirement to construct a prompt to instruct LLMs in generating the final code solution.
The constructed prompt also consists of three parts, i.e., an instruction, some demonstrations, and
a query, as depicted in Figure 3 (d).
4 EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN
To evaluate the effectiveness of ClarifyGPT , we conduct comprehensive experiments. In this
section, we illustrate our experimental design, including research questions, models, benchmarks,
metrics, baselines, and implementation details.
4.1 Research Questions
We address the following three research questions to assess the performance of ClarifyGPT .
RQ1: How does the ClarifyGPT perform when receiving real user feedback in compar-
ison to baseline approaches? In real-world scenarios, our ClarifyGPT assists users in writing
code by interacting with them, i.e., asking for clarification and receiving user feedback. Thus, in
this RQ, we explore whether ClarifyGPT with human in the loop can achieve higher performance
than existing code generation baselines. Since evaluating interactive code generation with human
participants is costly, we only select GPT-4 as the base model, and hire ten participants (includ-
ing academic researchers and industry developers) to manually answer the clarifying questions
generated by ClarifyGPT . We compare ClarifyGPT to three baselines on two benchmarks (i.e.,
MBPP-sanitized and MBPP-ET).
RQ2: How does the ClarifyGPT perform when receiving simulated user feedback com-
pared to the state-of-the-art baseline approaches? This RQ performs large-scale automated
evaluations of ClarifyGPT across different LLMs and benchmarks without requiring user partici-
pation, which aims to further verify whether ClarifyGPT can achieve higher performance than
existing code generation baselines. We first propose a user simulation method that leverages LLMs
to simulate user feedback. Then, we apply three baselines and ClarifyGPT to two representative
LLMs (i.e., GPT-4 and ChatGPT), and evaluate their performance on four widely-used benchmarks
(i.e., HumanEval, MBPP-sanitized, HumanEval-ET, and MBPP-ET).
RQ3: How does the number of demonstrations in a prompt impact the performance of
ClarifyGPT ?Prompting techniques could be sensitive to the number of demonstrations [ 14,32].
In this research question, we measure the performance of ClarifyGPT with varying numbers of
demonstrations to investigate the prompt robustness of ClarifyGPT .
4.2 Studied LLMs
There are many LLMs available for code generation. However, the specific context of this work
necessitates that the LLMs possess a certain level of communicative competence, that is, the ability
to comprehend human instructions and formulate clarifying questions. Thus, the LLMs without
instruction tuning (e.g., InCoder [ 13] and CodeGen [ 33]) are not suitable as the base models applied
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 10 ---
10 Fangwen Mu, Lin Shi, Song Wang, Zhuohao Yu, Binquan Zhang, ChenXue Wang, Shichao Liu, and Qing Wang
Table 1. Statistics of benchmarks: the total number of problems in the benchmark (Problem Nums), the
average number of test cases per problem (AVG.Tests per Problem), and the average/maximum/minimum
number of prompt words in the benchmark (AVG/MAX/MIN.Words in Prompt).
Benchmark HumanEval HumanEval-ET MBPP-sanitized MBPP-ET
Problem Nums 164 164 427 427
AVG.Tests per Problem 7.8 107.5 3.1 101.7
AVG.Words in Prompt 67.7 67.7 14.5 14.5
MAX.Words in Prompt 249 249 47 47
MIN.Words in Prompt 17 17 7 7
toClarifyGPT framework. In this work, we select two representative chat-LLMs (i.e., ChatGPT
and GPT4) as base models to evaluate ClarifyGPT framework.
•ChatGPT [34] is one of the most powerful chat models empowered by OpenAI. It is trained
using a novel approach called Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF), which
seamlessly integrates reinforcement learning and human feedback. Specifically, ChatGPT is first
trained with vast amounts of natural language text and code files. Then, it is fine-tuned through
reinforcement learning, enabling it to adeptly comprehend and execute human instructions. In
our experiments, We use OpenAI’s API to access the ChatGPT model, i.e., gpt-3.5-turbo.
•GPT-4 [35] is OpenAI’s most advanced LLM, which can accept image and text inputs, emit text
outputs. It is also trained with reinforcement learning and learns to follow human instructions.
GPT-4 has demonstrated improved language understanding, allowing it to comprehend complex
and nuanced contexts, making it highly effective on many downstream tasks, including text
summarization, translation, and code generation [ 6]. In our experiments, we use OpenAI’s API
to access the GPT-4 model, i.e., gpt-4-turbo.
4.3 Benchmarks
Following the previous work [ 7,11,17,26], We conduct experiments on four public code generation
benchmarks: HumanEval [ 8], MBPP-sanitized [ 4], along with their extended test case versions (i.e.,
HumanEval-ET and MBPP-ET [10]). The statistics of these benchmarks are shown in Table 1.
•HumanEval [8] is a hand-written problem-solving dataset crafted subsequent to the cut-off
date of Codex’s training dataset, consisting of 164 Python programming problems. Programming
problems in the HumanEval concern language comprehension, algorithms, and mathematics.
Each problem includes a function signature, a natural language requirement, and several unit
tests. A problem is considered solved by code-LLMs when all unit tests are passed.
•MBPP-sanitized [4] is a hand-verified subset of MBPP (Mostly Basic Programming Problems)
dataset, which contains 427 crowd-sourced Python programming problems, involving numeric
manipulations, standard libraries functionality, and more. Each problem contains a function
signature, a user requirement, and three test cases.
•HumanEval-ET andMBPP-ET [10] are two extended versions of HumanEval and MBPP
benchmarks with an average of 100+ additional test cases per problem. To improve the reliability
of generated code evaluation, they collect many edge test cases that are not included in original
benchmarks.
4.4 Evaluation Metrics
We evaluate the accuracy of the generated code using the metric Pass@ 𝑘[22]. This metric serves
as an estimator of the generational capabilities under a specific budget, which is widely used in
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 11 ---
ClarifyGPT: Empowering LLM-based Code Generation with Intention Clarification 11
previous LLM-related studies [ 7,23,51]. For each problem in the benchmarks, we generate 𝑘code
solutions, and if any of the 𝑘code solutions passes all tests, this problem is considered solved. In
real-world development scenarios, generating 𝑘code will impose a burden on developers, that
is, they need to read and understand 𝑘different code and select one as the target code. Thus,
in this paper, the 𝑘is set to 1, which satisfies most scenarios where developers consider only
single-generated code [ 11,17]. To avoid high variance and randomness, we run each approach
three times and report the average results as the final results.
4.5 Comparison Baselines
•Default LLM: takes the original requirements directly from benchmarks as inputs to prompt
LLMs for code generation.
•CoT (Chain-of-Thought) [47]: generates a series of reasoning steps for each requirement by
using the CoT prompt and then generates the corresponding code. To ensure the fairness of
comparison, the CoT baseline has the same number of demonstrations (i.e., three demonstrations)
and demonstration seeds.
•GPT-Engineer2: is a recent open-source Github repository. It utilizes manual-designed instruc-
tions to elicit LLMs to ask clarifying questions for the input user requirements and then generates
code snippets based on user feedback.
4.6 Implementation Details
The implementation details of constructing prompts and configuring models in ClarifyGPT are as
follows.
Prompt Construction. Since the four benchmarks do not have training sets, following previous
work [ 44,47], we select the first three problems from each benchmark and extract the user require-
ments from these problems as demonstration seeds. Subsequently, we manually create distinct
demonstrations for various prompts, as illustrated in Figure 3. It should be noted that the reason
we only create three demonstrations for each prompt is due to the input length limit of LLMs.
Model Configuration. We treat the two LLMs used in the experiments as black box generators
and only set a few interface parameters they provide without accessing internal parameters. For all
LLMs, we set the top p to 0.95, the frequency_penalty to 0. The max_tokens represents the maximum
number of tokens to be generated, which is set to 800 for the prompt of asking clarifying questions
and 300 for other prompts. In particular, we set the temperature to 0, except when sampling code
solutions, for which the temperature is set to 0.8. We follow Chen et al. [ 8] to truncate the content
generated in HumanEval and MBPP by five stop sequences: “\nclass”, “\ndef”, “\n#”, “\nif”, and
“\nprint”.
5 RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
5.1 RQ1: How does ClarifyGPT perform when receiving real user feedback in
comparison to baseline approaches?
Setup. In this RQ, we explore how ClarifyGPT performs in real-world scenarios, that is, whether
ClarifyGPT can achieve higher performance than existing code generation baselines when receiv-
ing real user feedback. Specifically, we apply ClarifyGPT to the GPT-4 model. Since MBPP-ET
benchmark shares the same user requirements as MBPP-sanitized, we only apply ClarifyGPT to the
original versions of the benchmark (i.e., MBPP-sanitized) and report ClarifyGPT ’s performance on
these two benchmarks using their respective unit tests. ClarifyGPT first takes the user requirement
of each problem in the benchmarks as input and determines them as ambiguous or unambiguous.
2https://github.com/AntonOsika/gpt-engineer
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 12 ---
12 Fangwen Mu, Lin Shi, Song Wang, Zhuohao Yu, Binquan Zhang, ChenXue Wang, Shichao Liu, and Qing Wang
Table 2. The Pass@1(%) of ClarifyGPT (Human Feedback) and baselines on two code generation benchmarks.
Numbers in red denote ClarifyGPT ’s relative improvements compared to the Default .
MethodsGPT-4
MBPP-sanitized MBPP-ET Average
Default 70.96 51.52 61.24
CoT 72.68 53.79 63.24
GPT-Engineer 73.77 54.96 64.37
ClarifyGPT (Human Feedback) 80.80 60.19 70.50
Relative Improvement 13.87% ↑ 16.83% ↑15.35% ↑
Then, it generates clarifying questions for the ambiguous requirements (as shown in Figure 1).
In total, we obtained 140 problems with ambiguous requirements from MBPP-sanitized bench-
mark. The average number of clarifying questions per problem is 2.85. We crafted three identical
questionnaires for each problem, ensuring that each problem would be assessed by three different
participants. Each questionnaire consists of three elements: (1) the (ambiguous) requirement of
the problem, which describes the problem’s intent; (2) the unit test cases containing expected
input-output examples, which assist participants in understanding the problem’s intent; (3) the
generated clarifying questions, which participants are required to answer.
We recruited ten participants, including three Ph.D. students, two Master’s students, two senior
researchers, and three industry developers. None of them are co-authors of this paper. All partic-
ipants have at least three years of experience in Python development, with six of them having
more than five years of experience. Participants were initially provided with task descriptions and
example questionnaires that contained appropriate question answers. After completing a training
exercise, we assigned 42 problems to each participant and asked them to respond to the clarifying
questions based on the information provided in the questionnaires. Each problem will be solved by
three participants.
We collected the answers provided by the participants and input them into ClarifyGPT to
generate final code solutions. As mentioned earlier, we evaluated the correctness of the generated
code on the two benchmarks using the unit test cases. Since each problem’s clarifying questions
were answered by three participants, we report the average Pass@1 results.
Results. The comparison results between the performance of ClarifyGPT and other baselines are
depicted in Table 2. The values in red are ClarifyGPT ’s relative improvements compared to the
Default baseline.
We can see that ClarifyGPT (Human Feedback) achieves the highest performance on all four
benchmarks. Compared with the Default ,ClarifyGPT (Human Feedback) demonstrates superior
performance with respect to the Pass@1 metric, achieving an increase of 13.87% on MBPP-sanitized
and 16.83% on MBPP-ET. Furthermore, when compared to the best-performing baselines (i.e., CoT
or GPT-Engineer), ClarifyGPT (Human Feedback) also improves the performance of Pass@1
by 9.53% on MBPP-sanitized and 9.52% on MBPP-ET. This is mainly because ClarifyGPT can
proficiently identify ambiguous requirements and raise targeted clarification questions. Users easily
clarify their intentions by responding to these questions, thus facilitating the generation of more
correct code by LLMs. It indicates that ClarifyGPT , as an interactive code generation framework,
can support developers in writing code within real-world development contexts.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 13 ---
ClarifyGPT: Empowering LLM-based Code Generation with Intention Clarification 13
Answering RQ1: In human evaluation, ClarifyGPT elevates the performance (Pass@1) of
GPT-4 on MBPP-sanitized from 70.96% to 80.8%; elevates its performance on MBPP-ET from
51.52% to 60.19%. The relative improvement is 15.35% on average, outperforming the baselines.
5.2 RQ2: How does the ClarifyGPT perform when receiving simulated user feedback
compared to the state-of-the-art baseline approaches?
Setup. Due to the involvement of human participants, evaluating the interactive code generation
framework ClarifyGPT is very expensive and hard to reproduce. A relatively simple solution is to
conduct an offline evaluation [ 3]. However, it limits the system to selecting clarifying questions from
a set of pre-defined or labeled questions, which does not transfer well to the practical development
environment. In this RQ, we apply the User Simulation for Evaluation [ 15,39] method to facilitate
automated evaluations of ClarifyGPT across various LLMs and benchmarks, eliminating the
necessity for direct user participation.
The most crucial aspect of simulating user feedback is to ensure that the created user feedback
closely resembles the real feedback users would provide in the same environment. Low-fidelity
simulations can result in ClarifyGPT receiving feedback that is challenging to encounter in actual
practice, thereby yielding misleading outcomes and impacting our evaluation of ClarifyGPT ’s
performance. Hence, we propose a high-fidelity user simulation method that leverages LLMs
to generate user responses by providing LLMs with clarifying questions and ground-truth test
cases. Our key insight is that the ground-truth test cases contain expected input-output examples,
reflecting the desired functionality sought by users. Endowing LLMs with this prior knowledge
facilitates their understanding of user intent and enables the generation of high-fidelity simulated
user feedback. To instruct LLMs to solve this task, we design a prompt (as shown in Figure 3), which
also consists of three parts: (1) an instruction, which describes the task (i.e., simulating the user
responses) we want the LLMs to solve; (2) few-shot <requirement, ground-truth tests, clarifying
questions, answers> quadruples as demonstrations, which help LLMs in understanding and solving
the task; (3) a query, containing a user requirement and its ground-truth tests, which is feeds to
LLMs for generating simulated responses.
We apply three baselines (Section 4.5) and our ClarifyGPT to two SOTA LLMs (Section 4.2). We
evaluate them on four benchmarks (Section 4.3) and compare their performance by calculating the
Pass@1 metric (Section 4.4). For a fair comparison, all baselines adopted the same experimental
setup as our ClarifyGPT .
Results. Table 3 presents the comparison results between the performance of ClarifyGPT
(Simulated Feedback) and other baselines in terms of code generation. The values in red are
ClarifyGPT (Simulated Feedback)’s relative improvements compared to the Default baseline.
Overall, ClarifyGPT (Simulated Feedback) can substantially improve the performance of code
generation, achieving gains across different LLMs and datasets. For GPT-4 model, compared with the
Default baseline, ClarifyGPT (Simulated Feedback) demonstrates notable improvements in Pass@1
performance, achieving an increase of 11.34% on the HumanEval dataset, 10.35% on HumanEval-ET,
10.89% on MBPP-sanitized, and 13.49% on MBPP-ET. For ChatGPT model, when compared to
theDefault baseline, ClarifyGPT (Simulated Feedback) improves the performance of Pass@1 by
15.10%, 13.12%, 12.98%, and 19.07% on four benchmarks, respectively. The results demonstrate that
ClarifyGPT , which empowers LLMs to autonomously generate clarifying questions and refine
user requirements based on user feedback, facilitates users in clarifying their intentions, thereby
enhancing code generation performance by capturing user intentions.
We also note that, in comparison to the most related baseline (i.e., GPT-Engineer), exhibits
superior performance with respect to the Pass@1 metric, achieving an average improvement of
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 14 ---
14 Fangwen Mu, Lin Shi, Song Wang, Zhuohao Yu, Binquan Zhang, ChenXue Wang, Shichao Liu, and Qing Wang
Table 3. The Pass@1(%) of ClarifyGPT (Simulated Feedback) and baselines on four code generation bench-
marks. Numbers in red denote ClarifyGPT (Simulated Feedback)’s relative improvements compared to the
Default .
Methods HumanEval HumanEval-ET MBPP-sanitized MBPP-ET Average
ChatGPTDefault 64.63 57.32 65.57 46.68 58.55
CoT 68.70 60.37 66.59 49.18 61.21
GPT-Engineer 66.26 59.76 69.09 50.20 61.33
ClarifyGPT (Simulated Feedback) 74.39 64.84 74.08 55.58 67.22
Relative Improvement 15.10% ↑ 13.12% ↑ 12.98% ↑ 19.07% ↑15.07% ↑
GPT-4Default 78.86 70.73 70.96 51.52 68.02
CoT 80.10 72.56 72.68 53.79 69.78
GPT-Engineer 79.27 71.75 73.77 54.96 69.94
ClarifyGPT (Human Feedback) \ \ 80.80 60.19 70.50
ClarifyGPT (Simulated Feedback) 87.80 78.05 78.69 58.47 75.75
Relative Improvement 11.34% ↑ 10.35% ↑ 10.89% ↑ 13.49% ↑11.52% ↑
11.45%, 8.65%, 6.95%, and 8.56% across the four benchmarks. We attribute the improvements to our
novel techniques, i.e., ambiguous requirement identification and clarifying question generation.
Posing clarifying questions for every user requirement results in needless LLM-Human interactions
on unambiguous requirements, which places an additional burden on users and hurts the code
generation performance when producing off-topic questions. While ClarifyGPT can effectively
identify ambiguous requirements without any supervised training by conducting the code con-
sistency check. The inconsistent code snippets are taken as input to help ClarifyGPT formulate
targeted questions that guide users in clarifying ambiguity.
Besides, we observe that the performance of ClarifyGPT (Human Feedback) is slightly higher
than that of ClarifyGPT (Simulated Feedback). This suggests that our user simulation method
may generate user responses that do not fulfill the users’ intentions. However, both methods can
significantly improve the performance of code generation and achieve consistent gains across
different LLMs and benchmarks, demonstrating the reliability of our simulation method’s evaluation
results.
Answering RQ2: ClarifyGPT (Simulated Feedback) improves the average performance
(Pass@1) of GPT-4 across four benchmarks from 68.02% to 75.75%, improves the average perfor-
mance of ChatGPT across four benchmarks from 58.55% to 67.22%. Their relative improvements
are 11.52% and 15.07% respectively, and the average improvement is 13.27%.
5.3 RQ3: How does the number of demonstrations in a prompt impact the performance
ofClarifyGPT ?
Setup. In this RQ, we investigate whether the increase or decrease in the number of demonstrations
will affect the performance of ClarifyGPT (Simulated Feedback) on the code generation task.
Specifically, due to the limitation of the input length of LLMs, we vary the number of demonstrations
in the prompt from zero to three. Then, we apply the two LLMs to ClarifyGPT and its variants,
and assess their performance of four benchmarks. We run these methods three times and report
the average Pass@1 results as the final reports.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 15 ---
ClarifyGPT: Empowering LLM-based Code Generation with Intention Clarification 15
Table 4. Experimental results of ClarifyGPT with different number of demonstrations. Numbers in red
denote the relative improvement of ClarifyGPT with different number of demonstrations compared to the
Default .
Methods HumanEval HumanEval-ET MBPP-sanitized MBPP-ET Average
ChatGPTDefault 64.63 57.32 65.57 46.68 58.55
ClarifyGPT (zero-shot) 65.85 1.9% ↑ 58.13 1.4% ↑ 67.07 2.3% ↑ 48.01 2.8% ↑ 59.77 2.1% ↑
ClarifyGPT (one-shot) 72.80 12.6% ↑ 60.98 6.4% ↑ 70.96 8.2% ↑ 51.52 10.4% ↑ 64.07 9.4% ↑
ClarifyGPT (two-shot) 73.92 14.4% ↑ 63.21 10.3% ↑ 72.60 10.7% ↑ 53.63 14.9% ↑65.84 12.6% ↑
ClarifyGPT (three-shot) 74.39 15.1% ↑64.84 13.1% ↑ 74.08 13.0% ↑55.58 19.1% ↑67.22 15.1% ↑
GPT-4Default 78.86 70.73 70.96 51.52 68.02
ClarifyGPT (zero-shot) 79.26 0.5% ↑ 70.73 0.0% - 72.13 1.6% ↑ 52.22 1.4% ↑ 68.59 0.8% ↑
ClarifyGPT (one-shot) 83.93 6.4% ↑ 72.76 2.9% ↑ 75.88 6.9% ↑ 55.97 8.6% ↑ 72.14 6.2% ↑
ClarifyGPT (two-shot) 85.15 8.0% ↑ 75.61 6.9% ↑ 77.75 9.6% ↑ 56.67 10.0% ↑ 73.80 8.6% ↑
ClarifyGPT (three-shot) 87.80 11.3% ↑78.05 10.3% ↑ 78.69 10.9% ↑ 58.47 13.5% ↑75.75 11.5% ↑
Results. Table 4 presents a comparison of the performance between ClarifyGPT and its variants.
Overall, ClarifyGPT demonstrates robustness to the number of demonstrations in the prompts.
When varying the number of demonstrations from zero to three, ClarifyGPT consistently outper-
forms the Default baseline across two LLMs and four benchmarks.
We can observe that, as expected, the performance of ClarifyGPT increases with the number of
demonstrations. In particular, as the number of demonstrations in the prompt is incremented from
zero to three, concerning ChatGPT, ClarifyGPT achieves an average performance increase from
59.77% to 67.22% across four benchmarks. For the GPT-4 model, ClarifyGPT ’s average performance
increases from 68.59% to 75.75%. This is mainly because more demonstrations can provide a variety
of situations and information to LLMs, enabling them to better comprehend the context of the
problem and the required solution. Furthermore, LLMs can learn to generalize better through
demonstrations, that is, to infer a solution to a new situation from a known demonstration. This
allows LLMs to better adapt to different inputs and requirements.
We also find that ClarifyGPT ’s performance in the zero-shot setting exhibits a marginal im-
provement over the Default baseline, while its performance in the one-shot setting is significantly
enhanced compared to that of the Default baseline. We attribute this difference to the fact that
in the zero-shot setting, ClarifyGPT is expected to generate meaningful responses without any
demonstrations, which can be particularly challenging for complex tasks (e.g., requiring LLMs to
generate targeted clarifying questions). What’s more, zero-shot prompting relies solely on LLMs’
pre-trained knowledge and the wording of the given prompts, which may not offer sufficient guid-
ance or constraints for LLMs to produce accurate or contextually relevant responses. In contrast,
the performance of ClarifyGPT with the one-shot setting is significantly higher than that in the
zero-shot setting and is close to the performance of ClarifyGPT with the three-shot setting. This
indicates that ClarifyGPT has strong generalization performance when only one demonstration
is provided. We believe that in practical usage scenarios, utilizing ClarifyGPT in the one-shot
setting can serve as a trade-off between effectiveness and efficiency.
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 16 ---
16 Fangwen Mu, Lin Shi, Song Wang, Zhuohao Yu, Binquan Zhang, ChenXue Wang, Shichao Liu, and Qing Wang
Answering RQ3: Overall, ClarifyGPT demonstrates robustness to the number of demon-
strations in the prompts. When varying the number of demonstrations from zero to three,
ClarifyGPT consistently outperforms the Default baseline across two LLMs and four bench-
marks.
6 DISCUSSION
6.1 Case Study
Fig. 4. Two real cases from HumanEval and MBPP generated by two baselines and our ClarifyGPT .
To further evaluate the effectiveness of our approach, we conduct a qualitative analysis. As shown
in Fig. 4, we select two representative examples from two popular code generation benchmarks
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 17 ---
ClarifyGPT: Empowering LLM-based Code Generation with Intention Clarification 17
(i.e., HumanEval and MBPP). Each input requirement consists of a function signature and an NL
description. We take the ChatGPT [ 34] as the base model and utilize two baselines (i.e., Default and
GPT-Engineer) and ClarifyGPT to generate a code solution for each input requirement.
For the first example taken from MBPP-sa, the description “write a function to sort a list of
elements” does not specify whether this function should be sorted in ascending or descending order.
The default ChatGPT directly generates a code solution that sorts the given list in descending order,
which fails to pass the ground-truth test cases. GPT-Engineer poses five clarifying questions and
generates a correct code solution based on the user responses. However, some of those questions
are uninformative and can be answered by the information in the given requirement. For instance,
the answer to the third question “Are there any specific constraints for the sorting algorithm?” can be
inferred by the function name comb_sort mentioned in the function signature. The fifth question
“Are there any preferred programming language?” also seems trivial, since we can easily know that the
function should be implemented in Python based on the syntax of the function signature. Answering
these questions cannot obtain additional information; instead, it generates superfluous dialogues
that are detrimental to the user experience. Furthermore, it results in an increase in token counts
for both the LLMs’ input and output, consequently escalating operational expenses. By contrast,
ClarifyGPT can identify points of ambiguity in the requirements by comparing the different code
implementations, thereby asking targeted clarifying questions. As a result, ClarifyGPT only asks
one question “Should the sorting be in ascending or descending order?” and generates a correct code
solution.
For the second example, the user requirement is well-defined. Default ChatGPT generates
a correct solution, while GPT-Engineer produces an incorrect code solution. This discrepancy
primarily arises from GPT-Engineer’s inability to determine whether a requirement is ambiguous
or not. Consequently, even for this unambiguous requirement, GPT-Engineer still poses three
questions, which turn out to be uninformative. Moreover, these questions contribute to making
the refined prompt excessively lengthy, potentially causing confusion for the LLMs. In contrast,
ourClarifyGPT can determine whether a requirement needs clarification by conducting a code
consistency check. So we can see ClarifyGPT does not raise any questions for this requirement
but instead directly produces a correct solution.
6.2 Benefits and Limitations
In this section, we discuss some potential benefits and limitations of our ClarifyGPT .
Benefits. (1) In contrast to prevailing LLM-based code generation methods [ 7,23,27] that
leverage post-processing techniques to sample a substantial pool of candidate codes and then select
one,ClarifyGPT aims to directly clarify the input requirements by asking clarifying questions.
Hence, our framework contributes to the augmentation of interpretability in the code generated by
LLMs. By clarifying specific details within the requirements or adding supplementary knowledge
to them, users can readily discern corresponding alterations in the resulting code. This contributes
to providing users with guidance on how to formulate requirements to improve code generation,
thereby facilitating a clearer understanding of the generated code. (2) Our ClarifyGPT improves
the interactive skills of LLMs by empowering them with the ability to automatically ask clarifying
questions for ambiguous requirements. In this way, it serves to facilitate users in identifying ambi-
guities within requirements and provides guidance in clarifying their intentions without requiring
users to initially generate code and subsequently read and analyze code to refine requirements.
Thus, ClarifyGPT enhances the user experience and production efficiency.
Limitations. (1) Ideally, our framework is applicable to all LLMs. However, ClarifyGPT neces-
sitates that the LLMs possess a certain level of communicative competence, that is, the ability to
comprehend human instructions and formulate clarifying questions. Thus, the LLMs applicable
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 18 ---
18 Fangwen Mu, Lin Shi, Song Wang, Zhuohao Yu, Binquan Zhang, ChenXue Wang, Shichao Liu, and Qing Wang
to our framework are limited, i.e., the LLMs without instruction tuning (e.g., InCoder [ 13] and
CodeGen [ 33]) are not suitable as the base models applied to ClarifyGPT framework. (2) Due
to the use of code consistency checking to determine whether a requirement needs clarification,
ClarifyGPT is required to generate test inputs for the requirement and compare the test outputs
of the sampled solutions. Therefore, ClarifyGPT is not suitable for generating code with complex
input (e.g., image or file). In addition, for some code that does not return output values (e.g., deep
learning programs), using ClarifyGPT may also be subject to some limitations.
6.3 Threats to Validity
The first threat to validity is the potential for data leakage. Since these LLMs are trained on open-
source code repositories, it is possible that some public benchmarks were included in their training
data. This could bias our assessment of the proposed approach, as some model outputs may be
influenced by prior exposure to these benchmarks. To mitigate this threat, we carefully select
HumanEval [ 8], MBPP-sanitized [ 4], and their respective extended versions for our evaluation.
HumanEval is a manually crafted problem-solving dataset, introduced by OpenAI for assessing
Codex’s performance. MBPP-sanitized, on the other hand, is a hand-verified subset of the MBPP
dataset, comprising 427 Python problems that have undergone crowd-sourced verification. These
datasets have undergone meticulous manual review and have been widely employed in previous
research studies [7, 23, 46].
The second threat to validity is the user simulation for evaluation. Due to the involvement
of human participants, evaluating ClarifyGPT , an interactive code generation framework, is
very expensive and hard to reproduce. Thus, we propose a user simulation method to facilitate
automated evaluations of ClarifyGPT across various LLMs and benchmarks. However, low-fidelity
simulations can result in ClarifyGPT receiving feedback that is challenging to encounter in actual
practice, thereby yielding misleading outcomes and impacting our evaluation of ClarifyGPT ’s
performance. To mitigate this threat, we design a special prompt to provide LLMs with clarifying
questions and ground-truth test cases. By endowing LLMs with this prior knowledge, ClarifyGPT
facilitates LLMs’ understanding of user intent and enables the generation of high-fidelity simulated
user feedback. The results show that the performance of ClarifyGPT (Simulated Feedback) is very
close to that of ClarifyGPT (Human Feedback), proving that our proposed simulation method can
serve as a good proxy for the automatic evaluation of ClarifyGPT , eliminating the necessity for
direct user participation.
The third threat pertains to the generalizability of our experimental results. To address this issue,
on one hand, we have taken care to select two representative chat LLMs (ChatGPT and GPT-4) as
our base models and four popular datasets as the evaluation subjects. We apply the two LLMs to our
ClarifyGPT and assess their performance on these four datasets. On the other hand, considering
the inherent sensitivity of LLMs to prompts, we run baselines and ClarifyGPT three times to
help mitigate high variance and randomness. We report the average results as the final results.
The results show that our ClarifyGPT can substantially improve the performance of all LLMs,
achieving consistent gains across different datasets. Therefore, we believe that ClarifyGPT has
good generalizability, and can perform effectively in many related contexts.
7 CONCLUSION
In this paper, motivated by the observation that human developers typically ask clarifying questions
when they are faced with ambiguous requirements, we argue that empowering LLMs with the
ability to automatically clarify ambiguous requirements can improve code generation. To this end,
we propose ClarifyGPT , a code generation framework that enables LLMs to identify ambiguous
requirements and generate targeted clarifying questions. Specifically, ClarifyGPT consists of four
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 19 ---
ClarifyGPT: Empowering LLM-based Code Generation with Intention Clarification 19
main stages, i.e., test input generation, code consistency check, reasoning-based question generation,
and enhanced code generation. For a given requirement, ClarifyGPT first generates high-quality
test inputs by using prompting techniques and heuristic mutations. Then, it utilizes the generated
test inputs to conduct a consistency evaluation and identify the ambiguous requirements. Next,
ClarifyGPT formulates targeted clarifying questions for the identified ambiguous requirements
by prompting LLMs to engage in intermediate reasoning. Finally, it incorporates the clarifying
questions and their feedback to refine the original requirement and generate the final code solution
based on the refined prompt. In the evaluation part, we first apply GPT-4 to ClarifyGPT and recruit
ten participants to evaluate its performance on two public benchmarks. The human evaluation
results show that ClarifyGPT achieves a relative improvement of up to 16.83% in Pass@1 compared
to the Default baseline. Additionally, to automate the evaluation of ClarifyGPT , we introduce a
high-fidelity simulation method to simulate user feedback. We conduct comprehensive experiments
on four benchmarks (i.e., HumanEval, HumanEval-ET, MBPP-sanitized, and MBPP-ET) using two
LLMs (i.e., GPT-4 and ChatGPT). The extensive results illustrate that ClarifyGPT improves the
average performance of GPT-4 across four benchmarks from 68.02% to 75.75%, and improves
the average performance of ChatGPT across four benchmarks from 58.55% to 67.22%. Thus, we
believe that ClarifyGPT can significantly facilitate the practical application of LLMs in real-world
development environments.
REFERENCES
[1] 2023. website. https://github.com/ClarifyGPT/ClarifyGPT.
[2] Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Saikat Chakraborty, Baishakhi Ray, and Kai-Wei Chang. 2021. Unified Pre-training for Program
Understanding and Generation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2021, Online, June 6-11, 2021 . 2655–2668.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.211
[3]Mohammad Aliannejadi, Hamed Zamani, Fabio Crestani, and W Bruce Croft. 2019. Asking clarifying questions in
open-domain information-seeking conversations. In Proceedings of the 42nd international acm sigir conference on
research and development in information retrieval . 475–484.
[4]Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell I. Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang,
Carrie J. Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc V. Le, and Charles Sutton. 2021. Program Synthesis with Large Language Models.
CoRR abs/2108.07732 (2021). arXiv:2108.07732 https://arxiv.org/abs/2108.07732
[5]Sid Black, Stella Biderman, Eric Hallahan, Quentin Anthony, Leo Gao, Laurence Golding, Horace He, Connor Leahy,
Kyle McDonell, Jason Phang, Michael Pieler, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Shivanshu Purohit, Laria Reynolds, Jonathan Tow,
Ben Wang, and Samuel Weinbach. 2022. GPT-NeoX-20B: An Open-Source Autoregressive Language Model. CoRR
abs/2204.06745 (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.06745 arXiv:2204.06745
[6]Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat
Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, et al .2023. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712 (2023).
[7]Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Anh Nguyen, Daoguang Zan, Zeqi Lin, Jian-Guang Lou, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. CodeT:
Code Generation with Generated Tests. CoRR abs/2207.10397 (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2207.10397
arXiv:2207.10397
[8]Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Pondé de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harrison
Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov,
Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power,
Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias
Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas
Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N.
Carr, Jan Leike, Joshua Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira
Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech
Zaremba. 2021. Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code. CoRR abs/2107.03374 (2021). arXiv:2107.03374
https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374
[9]Kaustubh D. Dhole. 2020. Resolving Intent Ambiguities by Retrieving Discriminative Clarifying Questions. CoRR
abs/2008.07559 (2020). arXiv:2008.07559 https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.07559
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 20 ---
20 Fangwen Mu, Lin Shi, Song Wang, Zhuohao Yu, Binquan Zhang, ChenXue Wang, Shichao Liu, and Qing Wang
[10] Yihong Dong, Jiazheng Ding, Xue Jiang, Zhuo Li, Ge Li, and Zhi Jin. 2023. CodeScore: Evaluating Code Generation by
Learning Code Execution. CoRR abs/2301.09043 (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.09043 arXiv:2301.09043
[11] Yihong Dong, Xue Jiang, Zhi Jin, and Ge Li. 2023. Self-collaboration Code Generation via ChatGPT. CoRR abs/2304.07590
(2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.07590 arXiv:2304.07590
[12] Zachary Eberhart and Collin McMillan. 2022. Generating Clarifying Questions for Query Refinement in Source Code
Search. In IEEE International Conference on Software Analysis, Evolution and Reengineering, SANER 2022, Honolulu, HI,
USA, March 15-18, 2022 . IEEE, 140–151. https://doi.org/10.1109/SANER53432.2022.00028
[13] Daniel Fried, Armen Aghajanyan, Jessy Lin, Sida Wang, Eric Wallace, Freda Shi, Ruiqi Zhong, Wen-tau Yih, Luke
Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. 2022. InCoder: A Generative Model for Code Infilling and Synthesis. CoRR abs/2204.05999
(2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2204.05999 arXiv:2204.05999
[14] Shuzheng Gao, Xin-Cheng Wen, Cuiyun Gao, Wenxuan Wang, and Michael R Lyu. 2023. Constructing Effective
In-Context Demonstration for Code Intelligence Tasks: An Empirical Study. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07575 (2023).
[15] Michael D Gordon. 1990. Evaluating the effectiveness of information retrieval systems using simulated queries. Journal
of the American Society for Information Science 41, 5 (1990), 313–323.
[16] Xue Jiang, Yihong Dong, Lecheng Wang, Qiwei Shang, and Ge Li. 2023. Self-planning code generation with large
language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06689 (2023).
[17] Xue Jiang, Yihong Dong, Lecheng Wang, Qiwei Shang, and Ge Li. 2023. Self-planning Code Generation with Large
Language Model. CoRR abs/2303.06689 (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.06689 arXiv:2303.06689
[18] Kimiya Keyvan and Jimmy Xiangji Huang. 2022. How to approach ambiguous queries in conversational search: A
survey of techniques, approaches, tools, and challenges. Comput. Surveys 55, 6 (2022), 1–40.
[19] Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. 2022. Large Language Models
are Zero-Shot Reasoners. CoRR abs/2205.11916 (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2205.11916 arXiv:2205.11916
[20] Dmitrii Krasheninnikov, Egor Krasheninnikov, and David Krueger. 2022. Assistance with large language models. In
NeurIPS ML Safety Workshop .
[21] Lorenz Kuhn, Yarin Gal, and Sebastian Farquhar. 2023. CLAM: Selective Clarification for Ambiguous Questions with
Generative Language Models. (2023).
[22] Sumith Kulal, Panupong Pasupat, Kartik Chandra, Mina Lee, Oded Padon, Alex Aiken, and Percy Liang. 2019. SPoC:
Search-based Pseudocode to Code. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32: Annual Conference on
Neural Information Processing Systems 2019, NeurIPS 2019, December 8-14, 2019, Vancouver, BC, Canada . 11883–11894.
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2019/hash/7298332f04ac004a0ca44cc69ecf6f6b-Abstract.html
[23] Shuvendu K. Lahiri, Aaditya Naik, Georgios Sakkas, Piali Choudhury, Curtis von Veh, Madanlal Musuvathi, Jee-
vana Priya Inala, Chenglong Wang, and Jianfeng Gao. 2022. Interactive Code Generation via Test-Driven User-Intent
Formalization. CoRR abs/2208.05950 (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2208.05950 arXiv:2208.05950
[24] Caroline Lemieux, Jeevana Priya Inala, Shuvendu K Lahiri, and Siddhartha Sen. 2023. CODAMOSA: Escaping coverage
plateaus in test generation with pre-trained large language models. In International conference on software engineering
(ICSE) .
[25] Haau-Sing Li, Mohsen Mesgar, André F. T. Martins, and Iryna Gurevych. 2023. Python Code Generation by Asking
Clarification Questions. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers), ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023 . Association for Computational Linguistics, 14287–14306.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.799
[26] Jia Li, Ge Li, Yongmin Li, and Zhi Jin. 2023. Enabling Programming Thinking in Large Language Models Toward Code
Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06599 (2023).
[27] Yujia Li, David H. Choi, Junyoung Chung, Nate Kushman, Julian Schrittwieser, Rémi Leblond, Tom Eccles, James
Keeling, Felix Gimeno, Agustin Dal Lago, Thomas Hubert, Peter Choy, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Igor Babuschkin,
Xinyun Chen, Po-Sen Huang, Johannes Welbl, Sven Gowal, Alexey Cherepanov, James Molloy, Daniel J. Mankowitz,
Esme Sutherland Robson, Pushmeet Kohli, Nando de Freitas, Koray Kavukcuoglu, and Oriol Vinyals. 2022. Competition-
Level Code Generation with AlphaCode. CoRR abs/2203.07814 (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2203.07814
arXiv:2203.07814
[28] Chao Liu, Xuanlin Bao, Hongyu Zhang, Neng Zhang, Haibo Hu, Xiaohong Zhang, and Meng Yan. 2023. Improving
ChatGPT Prompt for Code Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08360 (2023).
[29] Jiawei Liu, Chunqiu Steven Xia, Yuyao Wang, and Lingming Zhang. 2023. Is Your Code Generated by ChatGPT
Really Correct? Rigorous Evaluation of Large Language Models for Code Generation. CoRR abs/2305.01210 (2023).
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.01210 arXiv:2305.01210
[30] Sewon Min, Julian Michael, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2020. AmbigQA: Answering ambiguous
open-domain questions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.10645 (2020).
[31] Noor Nashid, Mifta Sintaha, and Ali Mesbah. 2023. Retrieval-Based Prompt Selection for Code-Related Few-Shot
Learning. In Proceedings of the 45th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’23) .
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.

--- PAGE 21 ---
ClarifyGPT: Empowering LLM-based Code Generation with Intention Clarification 21
[32] Feng Nie, Meixi Chen, Zhirui Zhang, and Xu Cheng. 2022. Improving few-shot performance of language models via
nearest neighbor calibration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.02216 (2022).
[33] Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese, and Caiming Xiong. 2022.
Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13474
(2022).
[34] OpenAI. 2022. ChatGPT. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/.
[35] OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. CoRR abs/2303.08774 (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.08774
arXiv:2303.08774
[36] Anton Osika. 2023. GPT-Engineer. https://github.com/AntonOsika/gpt-engineer/.
[37] Sudha Rao and Hal Daumé III. 2019. Answer-based Adversarial Training for Generating Clarification Questions. In
Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short
Papers) . Association for Computational Linguistics, 143–155. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n19-1013
[38] Max Schäfer, Sarah Nadi, Aryaz Eghbali, and Frank Tip. 2023. Adaptive test generation using a large language model.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06527 (2023).
[39] Ivan Sekulić, Mohammad Aliannejadi, and Fabio Crestani. 2022. Evaluating mixed-initiative conversational search
systems via user simulation. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data
Mining . 888–896.
[40] Disha Shrivastava, Hugo Larochelle, and Daniel Tarlow. 2022. Repository-Level Prompt Generation for Large Language
Models of Code. CoRR abs/2206.12839 (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.12839 arXiv:2206.12839
[41] Jan Trienes and Krisztian Balog. 2019. Identifying unclear questions in community question answering websites. In
Advances in Information Retrieval: 41st European Conference on IR Research, ECIR 2019, Cologne, Germany, April 14–18,
2019, Proceedings, Part I 41 . Springer, 276–289.
[42] Vasudev Vikram, Caroline Lemieux, and Rohan Padhye. 2023. Can Large Language Models Write Good Property-Based
Tests? arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04346 (2023).
[43] Jian Wang and Wenjie Li. 2021. Template-guided Clarifying Question Generation for Web Search Clarification. In CIKM
’21: The 30th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, Virtual Event, Queensland,
Australia, November 1 - 5, 2021 . ACM, 3468–3472. https://doi.org/10.1145/3459637.3482199
[44] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny
Zhou. 2022. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.11171
(2022).
[45] Yue Wang, Weishi Wang, Shafiq R. Joty, and Steven C. H. Hoi. 2021. CodeT5: Identifier-aware Unified Pre-trained
Encoder-Decoder Models for Code Understanding and Generation. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2021, Virtual Event / Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 7-11 November,
2021. Association for Computational Linguistics, 8696–8708. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.685
[46] Zhiruo Wang, Shuyan Zhou, Daniel Fried, and Graham Neubig. 2022. Execution-Based Evaluation for Open-Domain
Code Generation. CoRR abs/2212.10481 (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2212.10481 arXiv:2212.10481
[47] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed H. Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain
of Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Language Models. CoRR abs/2201.11903 (2022). arXiv:2201.11903
https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903
[48] Frank F. Xu, Uri Alon, Graham Neubig, and Vincent Josua Hellendoorn. 2022. A systematic evaluation of large language
models of code. In MAPS@PLDI 2022: 6th ACM SIGPLAN International Symposium on Machine Programming, San Diego,
CA, USA, 13 June 2022 . ACM, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1145/3520312.3534862
[49] Michal Zalewski. 2018. American fuzzing lop. https://lcamtuf.coredump.cx/afl/.
[50] Lingming Zhang, Darko Marinov, Lu Zhang, and Sarfraz Khurshid. 2011. An Empirical Study of JUnit Test-Suite
Reduction. In IEEE 22nd International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering, ISSRE 2011, Hiroshima, Japan,
November 29 - December 2, 2011 , Tadashi Dohi and Bojan Cukic (Eds.). IEEE Computer Society, 170–179. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ISSRE.2011.26
[51] Tianyi Zhang, Tao Yu, Tatsunori B. Hashimoto, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Daniel Fried, and Sida I. Wang. 2022. Coder
Reviewer Reranking for Code Generation. CoRR abs/2211.16490 (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2211.16490
arXiv:2211.16490
, Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: October 2023.
