# 2305.06599.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: /home/admin88/arxiv-downloader/math/2305.06599.pdf
# File size: 844292 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Structured Chain-of-Thought Prompting for Code Generation
Jia Li♂
lijia@stu.pku.edu.cn
Peking University
Beijing, ChinaGe Li
Peking University
Beijing, China
lige@pku.edu.cn
Yongmin Li
Peking University
Beijing, China
liyongmin@pku.edu.cnZhi Jin
Peking University
Beijing, China
zhijin@pku.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
Large Language Models (LLMs) ( e.g.,ChatGPT) have shown im-
pressive performance in code generation. LLMs take prompts as
inputs, and Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting is the state-of-the-
art prompting technique. CoT prompting asks LLMs first to generate
CoTs ( i.e.,intermediate natural language reasoning steps) and then
output the code. However, CoT prompting is designed for natural
language generation and has low accuracy in code generation.
In this paper, we propose Structured CoTs (SCoTs) and present
a novel prompting technique for code generation, named SCoT
prompting. Our motivation is source code contains rich structural
information and any code can be composed of three program struc-
tures ( i.e.,sequence, branch, and loop structures) [ 3]. Intuitively,
structured intermediate reasoning steps make for structured source
code. Thus, we ask LLMs to use program structures to build CoTs,
obtaining SCoTs. Then, LLMs generate the final code based on
SCoTs. Compared to CoT prompting, SCoT prompting explicitly
constraints LLMs to think about how to solve requirements from
the view of source code and further the performance of LLMs
in code generation. We apply SCoT prompting to two LLMs ( i.e.,
ChatGPT and Codex) and evaluate it on three benchmarks ( i.e.,Hu-
manEval, MBPP, and MBCPP). (1) SCoT prompting outperforms
the state-of-the-art baseline - CoT prompting by up to 13.79%
in Pass@1. (2) Human evaluation shows human developers prefer
programs from SCoT prompting. (3) SCoT prompting is robust to
examples and achieves substantial improvements.
ACM Reference Format:
Jia Li♂, Ge Li, Yongmin Li, and Zhi Jin. 2023. Structured Chain-of-Thought
Prompting for Code Generation. In Proceedings of ACM Conference (Con-
ference’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1 INTRODUCTION
Code generation aims to automatically generate a program that
satisfies a given natural language requirement [ 13,14,38]. Large
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
©2023 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YY/MM. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1. Initialize a result with -9999992. Iterate through the list of lists3. Initialize a sum with 04. Iterate through the list5. Add the element to the sum6. Update result with the maximum of sum and result7.DividetheresultbyK8. Return the resultInput:arry:list[list],K:intOutput:result:intorfloat1: Initialize a result with-9999992: for_listinthe list of lists:3: Calculate the sum of the _list4: ifthesumisgreatthanresult:5:Updatetheresult6:DivideresultbyK7: returnresult(a)Chain-of-Thought
(b)StructuredChain-of-ThoughtLoopStructureBranchStructureSequenceStructureFigure 1: The comparison of a Chain-of-Thoughts (CoT) and
our Structured Chain-of-Thought (SCoT).
Language Models (LLMs) have recently shown impressive perfor-
mance in code generation, such as ChatGPT [ 18], and CodeGen
[17]. During the inference, LLMs take a prompt as input that con-
sists of several examples ( e.g.,<requirement, code >pairs) and a
new requirement. LLMs learn code generation from examples and
analogously generate a new program. The performance of LLMs
heavily relies on the prompt [ 39]. Nowadays, how to make an effec-
tive prompt ( i.e., Prompting technique ) for code generation is still
an open question.
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting [ 35] is the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) prompting technique. CoT Prompting asks LLMs first to
generate a CoT and then output the code. A CoT is several interme-
diate natural language reasoning steps that describe how to write
code step by step. Figure 1 (a) shows a CoT on code generation.
However, CoT prompting brings slight improvements in code gen-
eration. For example, it only improves ChatGPT by 0.82 points in
Pass@1 upon a real-world benchmark [7].
In this paper, we propose a Structured CoT for code gen-
eration. Our motivation is that code generation aims to convert a
natural language requirement to source code. Different from nat-
ural languages, source code contains rich structural information
[22,30,37]. For example, source code contains three basic structuresarXiv:2305.06599v3  [cs.SE]  7 Sep 2023

--- PAGE 2 ---
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Jia Li♂, Ge Li, Yongmin Li, and Zhi Jin
[3], including sequence, branch, and loop structures. Intuitively,
intermediate reasoning steps leading to the structured code should
also be structured. Consider a human developer’s thought process
when solving a requirement ( e.g.,find the maximum number in a
list ). It is typical to come up with a solving process with program
structures: “Initialize a result with -inf; for each number in the list;
if the number is greater than result: Update result with the number
... ”. Our idea is to enable LLMs to generate similar structured CoTs -
a coherent series of intermediate reasoning steps constructed by
program structures. Besides, LLMs’ training data contains lots of
code data, so they have the ability to generate program structures.
However, standard CoT ignores the program structures and has
low accuracy in code generation. Thus, it is necessary to design
a structured CoT to unlock the reasoning ability of LLMs in code
generation.
Figure 1 (b) shows a SCoT. The design of our SCoT has two
inspirations. First, existing work [ 3] proved that any simple or
complex program can be composed of three basic structures, i.e.,
sequence structure, branch structure, and loop structure. Thus, we
introduce three basic structures and constrain LLMs to use them
to generate CoTs. As shown in Figure 1 (b), the SCoT uses a loop
structure to clearly describe an iteration in line 2. While in the
CoT, the scopes of two iterations in lines 2 and 4 are ambiguous. It
shows the superiority of SCoT in code generation. Besides, every
program contains a required input-output structure, which includes
the input-output parameters and their types ( e.g.,Input: array:
list[list]; Output: result in Figure 1 (b)). By generating the
input-output structure, LLMs are asked to analyze requirements
and determine the entry and exit of the code, which benefits the
following solving process.
Based on the SCoT, we present a new prompting technique
named SCoT prompting. It asks LLMs first to generate a SCoT
using program structures and then implement the code. Compared
to CoT prompting, SCoT prompting explicitly introduces program
structures into intermediate reasoning steps and constraints LLMs
to think about how to solve requirements from the view of pro-
gramming languages. It further unlocks the reasoning ability of
LLMs in code generation, thus achieving higher accuracy.
We apply SCoT prompting to two popular LLMs ( i.e.,ChatGPT
[18] and Codex [ 7]) and evaluate it on three representative bench-
marks ( i.e.,HumanEval [ 7], MBPP [ 2], and MBCPP [ 1]). We use
unit tests to measure the correctness of generated programs and
report the Pass@ 𝑘(𝑘∈ [1,3,5]) [7]. Based on experimental re-
sults, we obtain four findings. (1) SCoT prompting significantly
improves the accuracy of LLMs on code generation. Compared to
the SOTA baseline - Chain-of-Thought prompting, in terms
of Pass@1, SCoT prompting outperforms it by up to 13.79%
in HumanEval, 12.31% in MBPP, and 6.63% in MBCPP. (2)
Human evaluation shows that human developers prefer programs
generated by SCoT prompting. (3) SCoT prompting is effective for
different LLMs and different programming languages. In terms of
Pass@1, it improves ChatGPT by up to 13.79% and Codex by up to
13.77%. Besides, SCoT prompting is language-agnostic and effective
in multiple languages ( e.g.,Python and C++). (4) We explore the
robustness of SCoT prompting to examples. Results show that SCoT
prompting does not depend on specific examples or writing styles.
We summarize our contributions in this paper as follows.•We propose a Structured Chain-of-Thought (SCoT), which utilizes
program structures to build the intermediate reasoning steps.
•We propose a novel prompting technique for code generation,
named SCoT Prompting. It prompts large language models first
to generate a SCoT and then implement the code.
•We conduct extensive experiments on three benchmarks. Quali-
tative and quantitative experiments show that SCoT prompting
significantly outperforms SOTA baselines ( e.g.,Chain-of-Thought
prompting).
•We discuss the contributions of different program structures and
the robustness of SCoT prompting.
Data Availability. We open source our replication package [ ?
], including the datasets and the source code of SCoT prompting,
to facilitate other researchers and practitioners to repeat our work
and verify their studies.
2 METHODOLOGY
In this section, we propose a Structured Chain-of-Thought (SCoT).
A SCoT denotes several intermediate reasoning steps constructed by
program structures. Then, we present a novel prompting technique
for code generation named SCoT prompting. SCoT prompting asks
LLMs first to generate a SCoT and then output the final code. In the
subsections, we first describe the design of our SCoT and further
show the details of SCoT prompting.
2.1 Structured Chain-of-Thought
Standard Chain-of-Thought (CoT) is several intermediate natural
language reasoning steps that lead to the final answer [ 35]. The CoT
is initially designed for natural language generation ( e.g.,common-
sense reasoning [ 26]). Thus, the CoT only uses natural languages
to sequentially describe how to solve a problem step by step. Fig-
ure 1 (a) shows a CoT on code generation. A limitation is that CoT
brings slight improvements in code generation. For example, adding
the CoT only improves ChatGPT by 0.82 points in Pass@1 upon a
real-world benchmark - HumanEval [7].
In this paper, we propose a Structured CoT. Our motivation is
that, unlike natural language generation, the goal of code generation
is highly structured code. Source code solves a problem through
special structures, including sequence structures, branch structures,
and loop structures. For example, given a requirement - reading
text from a given file , imagine a human developer’s thought
process. The developer will use program structures to design an
initial idea: “if the given file exists: read text from the file; else: raise
an error;” . The program structures clearly show the solving process
and benefit the following code implementation. Thus, intermediate
reasoning steps leading to the code should also be structured.
Figure 2 shows some examples of SCoT. Compared to the CoT,
our SCoT explicitly introduces program structures. Existing work
[3] proved that any simple or complex program can be composed
of three basic structures, i.e.,sequence structure, branch structure,
and loop structure Thus, we introduce three basic structures, whose
details are shown as follows.
•Sequence Structure. The intermediate steps are sequentially
placed and all steps are at the same level.
•Branch Structure. It starts with a condition and places different
intermediate steps for different results of the condition. In this

--- PAGE 3 ---
Structured Chain-of-Thought Prompting for Code Generation Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Input: paren_string: strOutput: list_of_int: List[int]1: Initialize list_of_intto an empty list2: foreach string inparen_stringdo3: Initialize depth to 04: foreach character instring do5: ifcharacter is'('then6: depth += 17: elifcharacter is ')'then8: depth -= 19: append depth to list_of_int10: returnlist_of_intInput: string: str, substring: str Output: count: int1: Initialize count to 02: whilesubstring is not found in string do3: ifstring is empty then4: return05:increment count6: remove the first character of string7: returncountLoopStructureBranchStructure
LoopStructure
SequenceStructure(a)
(b)
Figure 2: Examples of SCoT in code generation.
paper, branch structures contain three formats, i.e.,if ... ,if
... else , and if ... elif ... else .
•Loop Structure. A set of intermediate steps are repeatedly con-
ducted until given conditions are not met. In this paper, loop
structures contain two basic formats, including the for loop
and the while loop .
We allow the nesting between different program structures. It
allows LLMs to design more complex SCoT for some difficult re-
quirements. As shown in Figure 2, the SCoT flexibly uses various
program structures to build a solving process.
Besides three basic structures, we add the input-output structure,
which contains input-output parameters and their types. Our moti-
vation is that an input-output structure is required for a program,
which indicates the entry and exit. Generating the input-output
structure is beneficial to clarify requirements and generate the
following solving process.
2.2 SCoT prompting
Based on the SCoT, we propose a new prompting technique for code
generation, named SCoT prompting. It asks LLMs first to generate
a SCoT and then output the final code.
To implement SCoT prompting, we design two special prompts.
The first prompt is used to generate a SCoT, and an example of
the prompt is shown in Figure 3. The prompt starts with several
examples ( i.e.,<requirement, SCoTs >). These examples cover three
basic program structures and the input-output structure. Next, the
italic sentences are instructions for LLMs, which indicate the goal
of LLMs and related constraints. Finally, the prompt ends with a
new requirement and is fed into LLMs. We expect LLMs to learn
from examples and generate a SCoT for the new requirement.
After generating a SCoT, we design the second prompt for gener-
ating the final code. An example of the prompt is shown in Figure 4.
deffirst_Repeated_Char(str):"""Write a python function to find the first repeated character in a given string."""PassPleaseunderstandtherequirementandwritearoughsolvingprocess.Itstartswith ainput-outputstructure.Youshouldusethreebasicstructurestobuildthesolvingprocess,includingsequences,branches,andloops.Thenecessarydetailsshouldbewritteninnaturallanguages.Input: str: a stringOutput: ch: a repeated character instr1: foreach character chinstr:2: ifchappears more than once in str:3: returnch4: returnNone(moreexamples…)deftext_lowercase_underscore(text):"""Write a function to find sequences of lowercase letters joined with an underscore."""passPleaseunderstandtherequirementandwritearoughsolvingprocess.Itstartswith ainput-outputstructure.Youshouldusethreebasicstructurestobuildthesolvingprocess,includingsequences,branches,andloops.Thenecessarydetailsshouldbewritteninnaturallanguages.AnExample
AnewinputFigure 3: A prompt for generating a SCoT.
deffirst_Repeated_Char(str):"""Write a python function to find the first repeated character in a given string.Input: str: a stringOutput: ch: a repeated character in str1: for each character chin str:2: if chappears more than once in str:3: return ch4: return None"""#Pleasechecktheabovesolvingprocessandwriteacodebasedonit.Notethatthesolvingprocessmaycontainerrors.h = {}forchinstr:ifchinh: returnch;else: h[ch] = 0returnNone(moreexamples…)deftext_lowercase_underscore(text):"""Write a function to find sequences of lowercase letters joined with an underscore.Input: text: strOutput: seq: list of str1: Initializeseqasanemptylist2: for each word in text split by space do3: if word matches the pattern of lowercase letters joined with an underscore then4: append the word to seq5: return seq"""#Pleasechecktheabovesolvingprocessandwriteacodebasedonit.Notethatthesolvingprocessmaycontainerrors.AnExample
Anewinput
Figure 4: A prompt for generating the code.
The prompt starts with several examples ( i.e.,<requirement, SCoT,
code>). The italic sentences are instructions. We consider the SCoT
as a soft template and ask LLMs to implement a program. Finally,

--- PAGE 4 ---
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Jia Li♂, Ge Li, Yongmin Li, and Zhi Jin
the prompt ends with a new requirement and its SCoT, and is in-
put into LLMs. By learning from examples, LLMs generate a new
program based on the requirement and SCoT.
Related work [ 25] has found that generative models may be nega-
tively affected by error accumulation. Similarly, in SCoT prompting,
the generated SCoT may contain noises ( e.g., errors or missing
steps). These noises will further negatively affect code implementa-
tion. In this paper, we utilize two approaches to alleviating error
accumulation. First, as shown in Figure 4, we ask LLMs to double-
check the SCoT and fix possible noises. It allows LLMs to adaptively
refer to the SCoT and filter out noises. Second, SCoT prompting
utilizes a two-step generation pipeline. It provides a window of
opportunity to debug where the SCoT goes wrong. In practice, hu-
man developers can first check the generated SCoT and fix possible
errors. Then, the SCoT is used to generate code.
2.3 Implementation Details
SCoT prompting is a prompting technique for code generation,
which does not rely on specific LLMs. In this paper, we consider
ChatGPT as the default LLM. We select a few ( e.g.,three) <requirement,
code>pairs from real-world benchmarks ( i.e.,training data) as ex-
ample seeds. Then, we manually write the SCoT for seeds and obtain
examples - <requirement, SCoT, code >triples, which are used to
make prompts in Figure 3 and 4. A prompt contains three examples
by default. The examples and prompt templates are available in
our replication package. In the future, users can flexibly apply our
approach to more powerful LLMs in a plug-and-play fashion.
3 STUDY DESIGN
To assess SCoT prompting, we conduct a large-scale study to answer
four research questions. In this section, we present the details of our
study, including datasets, evaluation metrics, comparison baselines,
and implementation details.
3.1 Research Questions
Our study aims to answer the following research questions (RQ).
RQ1: How does SCoT prompting perform in terms of accu-
racy compared to baselines? This RQ aims to verify that SCoT
prompting has a higher accuracy than existing prompting tech-
niques on code generation. We apply three existing prompting
techniques and SCoT prompting to two LLMs. Then, we use unit
tests to measure the correctness of programs generated by different
approaches and report the Pass@k.
RQ2: Do developers prefer programs generated by SCoT
prompting? The ultimate goal of code generation is to assist hu-
man developers in writing code. In this RQ, we hire 10 develop-
ers (including industry employees and academic researchers) to
manually review the programs generated by SCoT prompting and
baselines. We measure the quality of programs in three aspects,
including correctness, code smell, and maintainability.
RQ3: Is SCoT prompting robust to examples? Prompting
techniques may be sensitive to example [ 39]. In this RQ, we mea-
sure the robustness of SCoT prompting to examples. Specifically,
we measure the performance of SCoT prompting with different
example seeds and different example writing styles.Table 1: Statistics of the datasets in our experiments.
Statistics HumanEval MBPP MBCPP
Language Python Python C++
# Train – 474 413
# Test 164 500 435
Avg. tests per sample 7.7 3 3
RQ4: What are the contributions of different program
structures in SCoT prompting? As stated in Section 2.1, SCoT
prompting introduces three basic structures and the input-output
structure. This RQ is designed to analyze the contributions of dif-
ferent structures. We select an LLM as the base model. Then, we
individually remove a program structure and report the fluctuations
in performance.
3.2 Benchmarks
Following previous studies [ 6,7,17,40], we conduct experiments
on three representative code generation benchmarks, including the
HumanEval in Python, MBPP in Python, and MBCPP in C++. The
details of the benchmarks are described as follows.
•HumanEval [7] is a Python function-level code generation
benchmark, which contains 164 hand-written programming prob-
lems. Each programming problem consists of an English require-
ment, a function signature, and several test cases, with an average
of 7.7 test cases per problem.
•MBPP [2] is a Python function-level code generation benchmark.
It contains 974 programming problems that involve simple nu-
meric manipulations or basic usage of standard libraries. Each
problem contains an English requirement, a function signature,
and three manually written test cases for checking functions.
•MBCPP [1] is a C++ function-level code generation benchmark.
It consists of 848 programming problems that are collected by
crowd-sourcing. Each problem contains an English description,
a function signature, and three test cases for checking the cor-
rectness of functions.
We follow the original splits of three datasets. The statistics of
the benchmarks are shown in Table 1. We randomly pick several
samples from training data to make examples in prompts (Section
2.3). Then, we measure the performance of different approaches
on test data. Because HumanEval does not contain train data, we
reuse examples from MBPP in HumanEval.
3.3 Evaluation Metrics
Following previous code generation studies [ 6,7,17,40], we use
Pass@ 𝑘as our evaluation metrics. Specifically, given a require-
ment, a code generation model is allowed to generate 𝑘programs.
The requirement is solved if any generated programs pass all test
cases. We compute the percentage of solved requirements in to-
tal requirements as Pass@ 𝑘. For Pass@ 𝑘, a higher value is better.
In our experiments, 𝑘is set to 1, 3, and 5, because we think that
developers mainly use Top-5 outputs in real-world scenarios.
Previous work [ 1,6,7] found that standard Pass@ 𝑘has high
variance and proposed an unbiased Pass@ 𝑘. We follow previous

--- PAGE 5 ---
Structured Chain-of-Thought Prompting for Code Generation Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
work and employ the unbiased Pass@ 𝑘. Specifically, we generate
𝑛≥𝑘programs per requirement (in this paper, we use 𝑛=20,
𝑘∈ [1,3,5]), count the number of solved requirements 𝑐, and
calculate the unbiased Pass@ 𝑘:
Pass @𝑘:= E
Problems1−𝑛−𝑐
𝑘
𝑛
𝑘(1)
We also notice that previous code generation studies use text-
similarity-based metrics ( e.g.,BLEU [ 21]). These metrics are initially
designed for natural language generation and are poor in measuring
the correctness of programs [ 7]. Thus, we omit these metrics in our
experiments.
3.4 Comparison Baselines
This paper proposes a new prompting technique for code genera-
tion. To assess the effectiveness of our approach, we select three
mainstream prompting techniques as baselines.
•Zero-shot prompting [7] directly feeds the requirement into
LLMs without examples. Then, it extracts a generated program
from LLMs’ outputs.
•Few-shot prompting [7] randomly selects several <require-
ment, code >pairs as examples. Given a requirement, it concate-
nates examples and the requirement together, making a prompt.
Then, the prompt is fed into LLMs, and LLMs predict a new
program.
•Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting [35] is a variant of few-
shot prompting. CoT prompting produces a special prompt con-
sisting of <requirement, CoT, code >triples as examples. A CoT
is several intermediate natural language reasoning steps.
To ensure the fairness of comparison, all baselines and SCoT prompt-
ing have the same number of examples ( i.e.,three examples) and
example seeds.
The criteria for selecting baselines are three-fold. (1) SCoT prompt-
ing is a prompting technique for code generation. Thus, we directly
compare it to existing prompting techniques for code generation.
We also notice some emerging prompting techniques in other fields,
such as Self-Consistency [ 31] and Least-to-Most [ 41]. But these
approaches are designed for specific tasks ( e.g.,Arithmetic reason-
ing) and can not be directly applied to code generation. Thus, we
omit them in this paper. (2) Our approach is to augment LLMs and
can be flexibly applied to different LLMs. Thus, we do not directly
compare LLMs to our approach. (3) We also omit some rank tech-
niques for code generation [ 6]. They first use LLMs to generate
many candidates and then leverage test cases or neural networks to
rerank candidates. We think our work and these rank techniques are
complementary. Users can use our approach to generate programs
and then use post-processing techniques to select the final output.
We further discuss the complementarity through experiments in
Section 5.2.
3.5 Base Large Language Models
There are many available LLMs for source code. Our motivation
is that existing LLMs can be divided into two categories: standardlanguage models and instruction-tuned models. For each category,
we pick a representative model as the base model.
(1) Standard language models are pre-trained on a large-scale
corpus with the next-token prediction objective. They are mainly
used to continually complete the given content, such as code com-
pletion. Thus, we pick the state-of-the-art completion model for
code - Codex [7] as a base model.
Codex [7] is a powerful language model for code generation,
which supports a commercial application - GitHub Copilot [ 9].
Codex’s training data contains both natural language and billions
of lines of code. We use OpenAI’s APIs to access the latest version
of Codex with 175 billion parameters, i.e.,code-davinci-002 [19].
(2) Instruction-tuned models refer to LLMs after instruction tun-
ing. Instruction tuning trains LLMs to understand human users’
instructions and perform tasks based on the instructions. We select
the state-of-the-art instruction-tuned model - ChatGPT [ 18] as a
base model.
ChatGPT [18] is the state-of-the-art LLM for code generation.
ChatGPT is trained with extensive natural language text and code
files. Then, it is trained with reinforcement learning and learns to
follow human instructions. We use OpenAI’s APIs to access the
ChatGPT, i.e.,gpt-3.5-turbo-0301 [18].
Our approach does not rely on specific LLMs and can be applied
to different LLMs in a plus-and-play fashion. In the future, we will
explore its usage on more powerful LLMs.
3.6 Sampling Settings
Following previous studies [ 7,17,40], we use nucleus sampling [ 11]
to decode programs from LLMs. To ensure the fairness of experi-
ments, all baselines and SCoT prompting generate 20 programs per
requirement. The details of sampling settings are shown as follows.
Baselines. The temperature is 0.8 and the top- 𝑝is 0.95. For zero-
shot and few-shot prompting, the maximum generated length is 300
tokens. The maximum generated length of CoT prompting is 600
tokens. Our motivation is that CoT prompting needs to generate
intermediate reasoning steps and code. Thus, it requires a larger
generation length.
SCoT prompting. In the first step, we sample 20 individual
SCoTs from LLMs per requirement. The temperature is 0.8 and the
top-𝑝is 0.95. The maximum generated length is 300 tokens. Then,
for each SCoT, we use LLMs to generate a corresponding program.
The temperature is 0 and the maximum generated length is 300
tokens. Finally, we obtain 20 programs for each requirement. The
total generation length of two steps is the same as CoT prompting.
4 RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
4.1 RQ1: How does SCoT prompting perform in
terms of accuracy compared to baselines?
In the first research question, we apply SCoT prompting and base-
lines to three benchmarks and use unit tests to measure the cor-
rectness of generated programs.
Setup. We apply baselines and SCoT prompting to two LLMs
(Section 3.5). Then, we measure the performance of different ap-
proaches on three code generation benchmarks (Section 3.2) using
the Pass@k (Section 3.3).

--- PAGE 6 ---
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Jia Li♂, Ge Li, Yongmin Li, and Zhi Jin
Table 2: The Pass@k (%) of SCoT prompting and baselines on three code generation benchmarks. The numbers in red denote
SCoT prompting’s relative improvements compared to the SOTA baseline - CoT prompting.
HumanEval MBPP MBCPPBase Model Prompting TechniquePass@1 Pass@3 Pass@5 Pass@1 Pass@3 Pass@5 Pass@1 Pass@3 Pass@5
Zero-shot prompting 49.73 66.07 71.54 37.07 43.54 48.58 47.53 60.09 64.22
Few-shot prompting 52.47 69.32 74.10 40.00 49.82 53.13 52.58 63.03 66.11
CoT prompting 53.29 69.76 75.52 41.83 51.04 54.57 53.51 63.84 67.03ChatGPT
SCoT Prompting 60.64 73.53 77.32 46.98 55.31 58.36 57.06 65.70 68.70
Relative Improvement 13.79% 5.40% 2.38% 12.31% 8.37% 6.95% 6.63% 2.91% 2.49%
Zero-shot prompting 40.20 61.78 68.11 27.07 43.81 47.93 40.25 54.17 60.65
Few-shot prompting 42.93 62.96 70.10 33.17 45.72 49.62 44.12 57.65 62.45
CoT prompting 43.79 63.41 71.56 35.66 46.57 50.11 45.79 58.92 62.56Codex
SCoT Prompting 49.82 66.56 75.14 38.29 50.74 53.16 48.34 60.77 64.19
Relative Improvement 13.77% 4.97% 5.00% 7.38% 8.95% 6.09% 5.57% 3.14% 2.61%
Results. The Pass@ 𝑘(𝑘∈[1,3,5]) of different approaches are
shown in Table 2. The numbers in red denote SCoT prompting’s rel-
ative improvements compared to the SOTA baseline - CoT prompt-
ing.
Analyses. (1)SCoT prompting achieves thebest results among
allbaselines. Table 2 shows that SCoT prompting can generate more
correct programs than baselines on three benchmarks. Compared
to the SOTA baseline - CoT prompting, in terms of Pass@1, SCoT
prompting outperforms it by up to 13.79% in HumanEval, 12.31%
in MBPP, and 6.63% in MBCPP. Pass@1 is a strict metric and it is
difficult to improve. The results show that SCoT prompting can
significantly improve the accuracy of LLMs on code generation
and is more promising than existing prompting techniques. (2)
SCoT prompting is effective indifferent LLMs andprogramming
languages. SCoT prompting is effective in different LLMs. Com-
pared to CoT prompting, in terms of Pass@1, SCoT prompting fur-
ther improves ChatGPT by up to 13.79% and Codex by up to 13.77%.
Besides, SCoT prompting is language-agnostic and can be applied
to different programming languages. As shown in Table 2, SCoT
prompting brings substantial improvements in Python ( i.e.,Hu-
manEval and MBPP) and C++ ( i.e.,MBCPP). (3)SCoT prompting unlocks
thereasoning ability ofLLMs oncode generation. LLMs can ben-
efit from generating intermediate reasoning steps. The baseline
- CoT prompting utilizes natural language steps but only brings
slight improvements. In terms of Pass@1, CoT prompting improves
few-shot prompting by up to 2% in HumanEval, 7.51% in MBPP, and
3.79% in MBCPP. In this paper, we introduce program structures
into intermediate reasoning steps and propose a Structured Chain-
of-Thought (SCoT). The SCoT constrains LLMs to use program
structures to generate intermediate steps, moving in the direction
of code. In terms of Pass@1, SCoT prompting improves few-shot
prompting by up to 16.05% in HumanEval, 17.45% in MBPP, and
9.56% in MBCPP. The improvements show that SCoT prompting
further unlocks the reasoning ability of LLMs in code generation.Table 3: The results of human evaluation in three aspects.
The numbers in red denote SCoT prompting’s relative im-
provements compared to the SOTA baseline - CoT prompting.
All the 𝑝-values are substantially smaller than 0.05.
Approach Correctness Code Smell Maintainability
Zero-shot prompting 1.012 1.523 1.372
Few-shot prompting 1.119 1.653 1.552
CoT prompting 1.225 1.689 1.616
SCoT prompting 1.412 1.869 1.873
Relative Improvement 15.27% 10.66% 15.90%
Answer to RQ1: SCoT prompting achieves higher accuracy
than baselines on three benchmarks. In terms of Pass@1, SCoT
prompting outperforms the SOTA baseline by up to 13.79% in
HumanEval, 12.31% in MBPP, and 6.63% in MBCPP. The signifi-
cant improvements show the effectiveness of SCoT prompting
in code generation.
4.2 RQ2: Do developers prefer programs
generated by SCoT prompting?
The ultimate goal of code generation is to assist developers in
writing programs. In this RQ, we hire 10 developers (including
industry employees and academic researchers) to manually review
the programs generated by SCoT prompting and baselines.
Setup. To ensure the fairness of evaluation, we follow settings
of human evaluation in previous studies [ 10,14]. We have care-
fully checked the evaluation settings and think our settings are
reliable. Specifically, we manually evaluate generated programs in
the following aspects:
•Correctness (whether the program satisfies the require-
ment). 0 point: the program is totally inconsistent with the re-
quirement. 1 point: the program is implemented, but misses some
details. 2 points: the program is correctly implemented.
•Code Smell (whether the program contains bad code smell).
0 point: There is a serious code smell. 1 point: some details are not

--- PAGE 7 ---
Structured Chain-of-Thought Prompting for Code Generation Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
# Return True is list elements are monotonically increasing or decreasing.Requirement:defmonotonic(l: list):ifall(l[i] <= l[i+1] foriinrange(len(l)-1)) orall(l[i] >= l[i+1] foriinrange(len(l)-1)):returnTrueelse:returnFalseFew-shotprompting:SCoTprompting(SCoT&SourceCode):Input: l: listOutput: TrueorFalse1: foreach element inl do2: ifthe element isgreater than its previous element then3: l increases4: ifthe element isless than its previous element then5: l decreases6: ifboth increase anddecrease then7: returnFalse8: else9: returnTruedefmonotonic(l: list):increasing= Falsedecreasing= Falseforiinrange(1, len(l)):ifl[i] > l[i-1]:increasing= Trueifl[i] < l[i-1]:decreasing= Trueifincreasinganddecreasing:returnFalseelse:returnTrue
Figure 5: Two programs generated by few-shot prompting
and SCoT prompting, respectively.
in place. There is code smell of low severity. 2 points: the details
are in place. No obviously better code in terms of performance
exists. If possible, resources are released accordingly. No obvious
code smell.
•Maintainability (whether the implementation is standard-
ized and has good readability). 0 point: the program does not
follow a consistent specification, or there are many meaningless
names in variable naming, or there are certain repetitions and re-
dundant code. 1 point: the program implementation meets certain
specifications. But some variable names can be further refined. 2
points: the program implementation is relatively standardized.
The variable naming is basically semantically straightforward,
and the readability is good.
We explain the above aspects to evaluators through some ex-
amples. We also discuss with evaluators and set the score of each
aspect to an integer, ranging from 0 to 2 (from bad to good). For
SCoT prompting and baselines, we select a fixed LLM as the base
model ( i.e.,ChatGPT) and collect 200 generated programs per ap-
proach. Finally, we obtain 800 programs for evaluation. We invite
10 developers with 3-5 years of development experience to eval-
uate the programs in the form of a questionnaire. The evaluators
include industry employees and academic researchers that are not
co-authors of this paper. The 800 programs are divided into 5 groups,
with each questionnaire containing one group. The programs are
randomly shuffled and anonymously reviewed by evaluators. Each
group is evaluated by two evaluators, and the final score is the
average of two evaluators’ scores. Evaluators are allowed to search
the Internet for unfamiliar concepts.
Results. The results of the human evaluation are shown in
Table 3. The numbers in red denote SCoT prompting’s relative
improvements compared to the SOTA baseline - CoT prompting.
All the 𝑝-values are substantially smaller than 0.05.
Analyses. SCoT prompting achieves thehighest scores inall
three aspects among allbaselines. Specifically, SCoT prompting
outperforms the SOTA baseline - CoT prompting by 15.27% in
correctness, 10.66% in code smell, and 15.90% in maintainability.We attribute the improvements to our proposed SCoT. The SCoT
constrains LLMs to use program structures to generate intermediate
reasoning steps. It allows LLMs to explore diverse solutions with
three basic structures, improving the correctness of the code. Then,
based on the SCoT, LLMs focus on implementing a program in
a standardized way. Thus, the generated programs contain fewer
code smells than ones from baselines.
Figure 5 shows two programs generated by SCoT prompting and
few-shot prompting, respectively. Both programs pass unit tests.
But the program from few-shot prompting contains a very complex
statement highlighted in Figure 5). Developers have to spend lots
of effort to understand and maintain this program. In contrast, the
program from SCoT prompting has good readability, and the SCoT
clearly explains the behavior of the code. Developers can further
use the SCoT as comments of the program for future maintenance.
Answer to RQ2: Human developers prefer programs gener-
ated by SCoT prompting. Specifically, SCoT prompting out-
performs the SOTA baseline by 19.93% in correctness, 11.25%
in code smell, and 16.17% in maintainability. A case study also
shows the program from SCoT prompting is easy to read and
maintain.
4.3 RQ3: Is SCoT prompting robust to examples?
As stated in Section 2.3, SCoT prompting requires manually written
examples to make prompts. In practice, people may write different
examples, which makes the performance of SCoT prompting varies.
Thus, in this RQ, we explore the robustness of SCoT prompting to
examples.
Setup. As stated in Section 2.3, we select some <requirement,
code>pairs as example seeds and manually write SCoTs for them,
obtaining examples in prompts. In this RQ, we measure the ro-
bustness of SCoT prompting to examples in two aspects, i.e.,seed
selection and writing style.
(1) Seed Selection. It aims to validate SCoT prompting does
not rely on specific seeds. We select three groups of <requirement,
code>pairs as seeds and ask an annotator to write SCoTs for them.
Then, we obtain three groups of examples. We measure the perfor-
mance of SCoT prompting with different groups of examples. (2)
Writing Style. People have different writing styles. It aims to vali-
date that SCoT prompting does not rely on specific writing styles.
We hire three annotators to independently write SCoTs for the same
example seed, and obtain three groups of examples. Annotator A is
a Ph.D. student in software engineering. Annotator B is a product
manager from the industry. Annotator C is a developer from the
industry. Then, we measure the performance of SCoT prompting
with different annotators.
For comparison, we also measure the robustness of CoT prompt-
ing in the above settings. We select ChatGPT as the base model and
conduct evaluations in HumanEval.
Results. The results are shown in Table 5 and 6, respectively.
Analyses. SCoT prompting is robust toexamples. As shown in
Table 5 and 6, SCoT prompting substantially outperforms CoT
prompting when using different example seeds or annotators. It
validates that SCoT prompting does not depend on specific seeds
or writing styles. It also shows that the improvements of SCoT

--- PAGE 8 ---
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Jia Li♂, Ge Li, Yongmin Li, and Zhi Jin
Table 4: The results of ablation study. The base model is ChatGPT.
Prompting TechniqueHumanEval MBPP MBCPP
Pass@1 Pass@3 Pass@5 Pass@1 Pass@3 Pass@5 Pass@1 Pass@3 Pass@5
CoT prompting 53.29 69.76 75.52 41.83 51.04 54.57 53.51 63.84 67.03
SCoT prompting 60.64 73.53 77.32 46.98 55.31 58.36 57.06 65.70 68.70
w/o Basic structures 55.67 70.94 76.13 43.36 53.64 56.57 54.79 64.32 67.77
w/o IO structure 59.65 72.79 77.12 46.13 54.76 57.88 56.61 65.01 68.42
Table 5: The Pass@k of CoT prompting and SCoT prompting
with different example seeds.
SeedCoT prompting SCoT prompting
Pass@1 Pass@3 Pass@5 Pass@1 Pass@3 Pass@5
Seed A 53.29 69.76 75.52 60.64 73.53 77.32
Seed B 52.81 68.97 74.55 60.27 73.11 77.16
Seed C 51.36 67.44 73.62 59.36 72.88 76.79
Table 6: The Pass@k of CoT prompting and SCoT prompting
with different annotators.
AnnotatorCoT prompting SCoT prompting
Pass@1 Pass@3 Pass@5 Pass@1 Pass@3 Pass@5
Annotator A 53.29 69.76 75.52 60.64 73.53 77.32
Annotator B 51.43 67.92 73.44 59.48 72.16 76.44
Annotator C 52.18 68.45 74.71 60.02 73.15 77.24
prompting come from the program structures instead of specific
details in examples.
We also notice that there are slight variances in the perfor-
mance of SCoT prompting under different settings. It is expected
for prompting techniques using examples. Similar variances can be
found in SCoT prompting, and SCoT prompting still outperforms
CoT prompting in different settings.
Answer to RQ3: SCoT prompting is robust to examples. Un-
der different example seeds or writing styles, SCoT prompting
substantially outperforms the SOTA baseline - CoT prompting.
4.4 RQ4: What are the contributions of different
program structures in SCoT prompting?
As stated in Section 2.1, SCoT prompting introduces basic structures
(i.e.,sequence, branch, and loop) and the input-output structure.
This RQ is designed to analyze the contributions of different pro-
gram structures.
Setup. We select ChatGPT as the base model. Then, we conduct
an ablation study by independently removing basic structures and
the input-output (IO) structure. When removing basic structures,
we use a CoT with an IO structure as the intermediate steps. When
removing the IO structure, the SCoT only contains a solving process
with basic structures. We select ChatGPT as the base model.
Results. The results are shown in Table 4. “w/o” is the abbrevia-
tion of without.
Analyses. (1)Three basic structures arebeneficial todesign a
feasible solving process. In Table 4, after removing basic structures,
Input:arry:list[list]Output:result:intorfloat1. Initialize a result with -9999992. Iterate through the list of lists3. Calculate the sum of the list4. Update the result with the maximum of sum and result5. Return the resultSCoTpromptingwithoutbasicstructures:
SCoTprompting:Input:arry:list[list]Output:result:intorfloat1: Initialize a result with-9999992: for_listinthe list of lists:3: Calculate the sum of the _list4: Update the result withthe maximum of sum andresult5: returnthe result
Figure 6: The comparison of SCoT prompting and SCoT
prompting without basic structures.
the performance of SCoT prompting drops obviously. We carefully
inspect failed cases and find that LLMs benefit from using basic
structures to clearly write a solving process. Figure 6 shows the
intermediate steps of SCoT prompting and SCoT prompting without
basic structures. SCoT prompting without basic structures uses
CoTs, which sequentially describe how to write the code line by
line and contain many ambiguities. For example, the scopes of
two iterations on lines 2 and 4 are unclear. LLMs are likely to
misunderstand the CoT and generate incorrect code. In contrast,
SCoT prompting uses three basic structures to describe the solving
process. The SCoT is clear and is similar to code, benefiting the
following code implementation.
(2)TheIOstructure benefits therequirement understanding. In
Table 4, after deleting the IO structure, the performance of SCoT
prompting has a slight decrease. We analyze failed cases and think
the IO structure benefits the requirement understanding. Figure 7
shows two programs from SCoT prompting and SCoT prompting
without the IO structure. We can see that SCoT prompting without
the IO structure wrongly understands the output format and gen-
erates an incorrect program. After adding the IO structure, LLMs
first reason about the input-output format and correctly return a
boolean value.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Structured Chain-of-Thought Prompting for Code Generation Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
Table 7: The comparison of SCoT-P prompting and SCoT prompting. The numbers in red denote SCoT prompting’s relative
improvements compared to SCoT-P prompting.
HumanEval MBPP MBCPPApproachPass@1 Pass@3 Pass@5 Pass@1 Pass@3 Pass@5 Pass@1 Pass@3 Pass@5
CoT prompting 53.29 69.76 75.52 41.83 51.04 54.57 53.51 63.84 67.03
SCoT-P prompting 55.23 70.33 75.94 43.28 52.16 55.77 54.25 64.09 67.78
SCoT prompting 60.64 73.53 77.32 46.98 55.31 58.36 57.06 65.70 68.70
Relative Improvement 9.80% 4.55% 1.82% 8.55% 6.04% 4.64% 5.18% 2.51% 1.36%
deftest_duplicate(arraynums):# Input: arraynums, a list of integers# Output: True if existduplicate element, False otherwisenum_set= set(arraynums)iflen(num_set) < len(arraynums):returnTrueelse:returnFalsedeftest_duplicate(arraynums):num_set= set(arraynums)iflen(num_set) < len(arraynums):print('Find duplicate elements‘)else:print('No duplicate elements')SCoTpromptingwithoutIOstructure:
SCoTprompting:
Figure 7: The comparison of SCoT prompting and SCoT
prompting without the IO structure.
Answer to RQ3: The input-output structure helps LLMs un-
derstand requirements and improves ChatGPT by up to 6.37%
in Pass@1. Three basic structures are beneficial to clearly de-
scribe a solving process and improve ChatGPT by up to 12.73%
in Pass@1.
5 DISCUSSION
5.1 SCoT vs.Pseudocode
We notice that the SCoT is similar to the pseudocode. The SCoT and
pseudocode both contain an input-output structure and a solving
process. We randomly select 100 generated SCoTs and manually
review them. We find that 26% of SCoTs are very close to the pseu-
docode. On one hand, we think the similarity enhances the usability
of our approach. For example, users can quickly know the behavior
of a program based on its SCoT. The SCoT also can be inserted into
the comment and benefits future maintenance. On the other hand,
the majority of SCoTs (74%) are different from the pseudocode be-
cause they are more abstract. Specifically, SCoTs tend to use natural
languages to summarize an operation, e.g.,calaluate the sum of
list1 . But the pseudocode contains more implementation details,
e.g.,sum←0; for i in list1: sum ←sum + i; .
Compared to the pseudocode, we think the SCoT is a better
choice for intermediate steps. Because a SCoT naturally decom-
poses code generation into two steps. LLMs first focus on exploring
diverse solutions and then implement a program in a standardized
way. To validate this point, we design a variant of SCoT prompting,
Pass@1 Pass@3 Pass@5
Pass@k0102030405060Value
ChatGPT
ChatGPT+CodeT
ChatGPT+CodeT+SCoTFigure 8: The complementarity between CodeT and SCoT
prompting.
named SCoT-P Prompting. It is similar to SCoT prompting, but
considers the pseudocode as intermediate steps. We apply SCoT-P
Prompting and SCoT prompting to ChatGPT and measure their
accuracy. The results are shown in Table 7. SCoT prompting sub-
stantially outperforms SCoT-P Prompting on three benchmarks.
The improvements show the superiority of our SCoT.
5.2 SCoT prompting vs.Rank Techniques
Some recent studies [ 6,12] propose rank techniques to improve the
performance of LLMs on code generation. Given a requirement,
they first sample many programs from LLMs and then use test
cases or neural networks to rerank sampled programs. For example,
CodeT [ 6] is a popular rank technique. CodeT does large-scale
sampling and executes sampled programs on auto-generated test
cases. Based on execution results, the programs are reranked. In this
paper, we do not directly compare our approach to rank techniques
due to two reasons.
(1)SCoT prompting and rank techniques have different focuses,
andthey arecomplementary. Our work aims to design a new prompt-
ing technique and improve the accuracy of LLMs in code generation.
Rank techniques do not care about LLMs and aim to pick the best
one from LLMs’ multiple outputs. In practice, users can use SCoT
prompting to generate many programs and then use rank tech-
niques to pick a final output.
To verify the complementarity between SCoT prompting and
rank techniques, we conduct an exploratory experiment. We select
ChatGPT as a base model and progressively introduce CodeT and
SCoT prompting. The results on MBPP are shown in Figure 8. We

--- PAGE 10 ---
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Jia Li♂, Ge Li, Yongmin Li, and Zhi Jin
can see that the performance of ChatGPT is continually improved
by adding CodeT and SCoT prompting.
(2)Rank techniques approaches relyonexecution environments.
Rank techniques require executing programs on test cases and using
execution results to rerank programs. In many realistic program-
ming scenarios, users want to get code suggestions for an unfinished
project. It is infeasible to execute auto-generated programs. Thus,
we think rank techniques have limited application scenarios and
make additional use of the execution results. Our approach works
in a general scenario and does not use execution results. Thus, it is
unfair to directly compare SCoT prompting to rank techniques.
5.3 Threats to Validity
There are three main threats to the validity of our work.
(1) The generalizability of experimental results. To miti-
gate this threat, we carefully select the benchmarks, metrics, and
baselines. Following previous studies [ 1,2,7], we pick three rep-
resentative code generation benchmarks. They are hand-written
or collected from real-world programming communities, and cover
two popular languages ( i.e.,Python and C++). For evaluation met-
rics, we select a widely used metric - Pass@ 𝑘, which utilizes test
cases to check the correctness of programs. We use the unbiased
Pass@ 𝑘which is more reliable [ 7]. For comparison baselines, we
select the SOTA prompting techniques and conduct a comprehen-
sive comparison in Section 4. SCoT prompting and baselines have
the same example seeds and maximum generation lengths.
(2) The impact of the two-step pipeline. CoT prompting
generates a CoT and the code in one step. Our SCoT prompting
generates the code in two steps. It first generates SCoTs and then
generates the code. It is possible that the improvements come from
the two-step pipeline. To solve this threat, we have two considera-
tions. First, LLMs in our experiments are auto-regressive language
models. For an auto-regressive language model, a one-step pipeline
and a two-step pipeline are theoretically equivalent. Second, we
conduct an ablation study in Section 4.4. We keep the two-step
pipeline unchanged and remove program structures. The results in
Table 4 show that SCoT prompting without prompt structures has
a significant drop in the Pass@k. It shows that the improvements
of SCoT prompting are brought by program structures instead of
the two-step pipeline.
(3) The data leakage. Existing LLMs are trained with extensive
code files from open-source communities. It is possible that their
training data contains the experimental benchmarks, leading to
data leakage. But we think that it does not affect the fairness of our
experiments. In this paper, we select a specific LLM ( e.g.,ChatGPT)
as the base model and apply different prompting techniques to
it. Thus, the reported relative improvements between baselines
and our approach are credible. In the future, we will add the latest
benchmarks to alleviate this threat.
6 RELATED WORK
Large language models (LLMs) for Source Code are large-scale
neural networks that are pre-trained with a large corpus consisting
of natural language text and source code. Nowadays, LLMs for
source code have been expanding and can be divided into two
categories: standard language models and instruction-tuned models.Standard Language models are pre-trained on a large-scale
corpus with the next-token prediction objective. They are mainly
used to continually complete the given context, such as code com-
pletion. After the success of GPT series [ 4,23,24] in NLP, OpenAI
fine-tunes GPT models on code to produce closed-source Codex [ 7].
There follow many open-source replication attempts, e.g.,Code-
Parrot [ 29], CodeGen [ 17], CodeGeeX [ 40], InCoder [ 8], StarCoder
[15] and CodeT5+ [33].
Instruction-tuned models are models after instruction tuning
[34]. Instruction tuning trains models to understand human users’
instructions and perform tasks by following instructions. ChatGPT
[18] is trained with human feedback [ 20], powerful on both natural
language tasks and programming tasks. Many attempt to train an
“open-source ChatGPT”. Alpaca [ 27] is LLaMA [ 28] tuned using
self-instruct [ 32] and ChatGPT feedback. Code Alpaca [ 5] is LLaMA
tuned using self-instruct and ChatGPT feedback, with instructions
focusing on programming tasks. WizardCoder [ 16] is StarCoder
[15] tuned using Evol-Instruct [ 36] and ChatGPT feedback with
Code Alpaca’s dataset as seed dataset. InstructCodeT5+ [ 33] is
CodeT5+ [33] tuned on Code Alpaca’s dataset.
Prompting Techniques. With the enormous number of pa-
rameters ( e.g.,Codex: 175 billion parameters), it is hard to directly
fine-tune LLMs on code generation. Prompting techniques are a pop-
ular approach, which leverages LLMs to generate code by inputting
a special prompt.
Early, researchers proposed zero-shot prompting and few-shot
prompting. Zero-shot prompting concatenates a task instruction
(e.g.,please generate a program based on the requirement )
and a requirement together, making a prompt. Based on the zero-
shot prompting, few-shot prompting further adds several ⟨requirement,
code⟩pairs to the prompts, so that LLMs can learn code generation
from given examples.
The Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting [ 35] is a recently pro-
posed prompting technique. CoT prompting asks LLMs first to
generate CoTs ( i.e.,intermediate natural language reasoning steps)
and then output the final code. It allows LLMs to first design a
solving process that leads to the code. CoT prompting has achieved
the SOTA results in natural language generation and sparked lots
of follow-up research, such as self-consistency prompting [ 31],
least-to-most prompting [ 41]. But these prompting techniques are
designed for natural language generation and bring slight improve-
ments in code generation.
In this paper, we propose a novel prompting technique named
Structured Chain-of-Thought (SCoT) prompting. Different from
standard CoT prompting, SCoT prompting explicitly introduces
program structures and asks LLMs to generate intermediate reason-
ing steps with program structures. We compare CoT prompting and
SCoT prompting in Section 4. The results show that SCoT prompt-
ing significantly outperforms CoT prompting in three benchmarks.
7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Large Language Models (LLMs) with Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompt-
ing is the state-of-the-art (SOTA) approach to generating code. It
first generates a CoT and then outputs the code. A CoT is sev-
eral intermediate natural language reasoning steps. However, CoT
prompting still has low accuracy in code generation. This paper

--- PAGE 11 ---
Structured Chain-of-Thought Prompting for Code Generation Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA
proposes a Structured CoT (SCoT) and presents a new prompt-
ing technique for code generation, named SCoT prompting. SCoT
prompting asks LLMs to generate a SCoT using program structures
(i.e.,sequence, branch, and loop structures). Then, LLMs generate
the code based on the SCoT. A large-scale study on three bench-
marks shows that SCoT prompting significantly outperforms CoT
prompting in Pass@k and human evaluation. Besides, SCoT prompt-
ing is robust to examples and obtains stable improvements.
In the future, we will explore new prompting techniques for code
generation. For example, source code can be represented by a tree
(e.g.,abstract syntax tree). We can design a tree-based prompting
technique, which uses LLMs to generate a tree.
REFERENCES
[1]Ben Athiwaratkun, Sanjay Krishna Gouda, Zijian Wang, Xiaopeng Li, Yuchen
Tian, Ming Tan, Wasi Uddin Ahmad, Shiqi Wang, Qing Sun, Mingyue Shang,
et al.2022. Multi-lingual Evaluation of Code Generation Models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.14868 (2022).
[2]Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk
Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang, Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le,
et al .2021. Program synthesis with large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2108.07732 (2021).
[3]Corrado Böhm and Giuseppe Jacopini. 1966. Flow diagrams, turing machines and
languages with only two formation rules. Commun. ACM 9, 5 (1966), 366–371.
https://doi.org/10.1145/355592.365646
[4]Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan,
Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al .2020. Language models are few-shot learners. Advances in neural
information processing systems 33 (2020), 1877–1901.
[5]Sahil Chaudhary. 2023. Code Alpaca: An Instruction-following LLaMA model
for code generation. https://github.com/sahil280114/codealpaca.
[6]Bei Chen, Fengji Zhang, Anh Nguyen, Daoguang Zan, Zeqi Lin, Jian-Guang
Lou, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. CodeT: Code Generation with Generated Tests.
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2207.10397
[7]Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de
Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg
Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf,
Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail
Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mohammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter,
Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fo-
tios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex
Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shan-
tanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh
Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles
Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei,
Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2021. Evaluating Large
Language Models Trained on Code. (2021). arXiv:2107.03374 [cs.LG]
[8]Daniel Fried, Armen Aghajanyan, Jessy Lin, Sida Wang, Eric Wallace, Freda Shi,
Ruiqi Zhong, Scott Yih, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Mike Lewis. 2023. InCoder: A
Generative Model for Code Infilling and Synthesis. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations . https://openreview.net/forum?id=hQwb-
lbM6EL
[9] GitHub. 2022. GitHub Copilot. https://github.com/features/copilot.
[10] Yiyang Hao, Ge Li, Yongqiang Liu, Xiaowei Miao, He Zong, Siyuan Jiang,
Yang Liu, and He Wei. 2022. AixBench: A Code Generation Benchmark
Dataset. CoRR abs/2206.13179 (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.13179
arXiv:2206.13179
[11] Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. 2020. The
Curious Case of Neural Text Degeneration. In 8th International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-30, 2020 .
OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/forum?id=rygGQyrFvH
[12] Jeevana Priya Inala, Chenglong Wang, Mei Yang, Andres Codas, Mark Encar-
nación, Shuvendu Lahiri, Madanlal Musuvathi, and Jianfeng Gao. 2022. Fault-
aware neural code rankers. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
35 (2022), 13419–13432.
[13] Jia Li, Ge Li, Zhuo Li, Zhi Jin, Xing Hu, Kechi Zhang, and Zhiyi Fu. 2023. CodeEd-
itor: Learning to Edit Source Code with Pre-Trained Models. ACM Trans. Softw.
Eng. Methodol. (may 2023). https://doi.org/10.1145/3597207 Just Accepted.
[14] Jia Li, Yongmin Li, Ge Li, Zhi Jin, Yiyang Hao, and Xing Hu. 2023. SkCoder:
A Sketch-based Approach for Automatic Code Generation. In 45th IEEE/ACM
International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE 2023, Melbourne, Australia,
May 14-20, 2023 . IEEE, 2124–2135. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE48619.2023.00179[15] Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Yangtian Zi, Niklas Muennighoff, Denis Kocetkov,
Chenghao Mou, Marc Marone, Christopher Akiki, Jia Li, Jenny Chim, et al .2023.
StarCoder: may the source be with you! arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06161 (2023).
[16] Ziyang Luo, Can Xu, Pu Zhao, Qingfeng Sun, Xiubo Geng, Wenxiang Hu,
Chongyang Tao, Jing Ma, Qingwei Lin, and Daxin Jiang. 2023. WizardCoder:
Empowering Code Large Language Models with Evol-Instruct. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.08568 (2023).
[17] Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou,
Silvio Savarese, and Caiming Xiong. 2022. CodeGen: An Open Large Language
Model for Code with Multi-Turn Program Synthesis. arXiv preprint (2022).
[18] OpenAI. 2022. ChatGPT. https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt.
[19] OpenAI. 2022. Codex. https://beta.openai.com/docs/api-reference/completions.
[20] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela
Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al .2022.
Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022), 27730–27744.
[21] Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a
method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics . 311–318.
[22] Han Peng, Ge Li, Wenhan Wang, Yunfei Zhao, and Zhi Jin. 2021. Integrat-
ing Tree Path in Transformer for Code Representation. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual , Marc’Aurelio
Ranzato, Alina Beygelzimer, Yann N. Dauphin, Percy Liang, and Jennifer Wort-
man Vaughan (Eds.). 9343–9354. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/
hash/4e0223a87610176ef0d24ef6d2dcde3a-Abstract.html
[23] Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans, Ilya Sutskever, et al .2018.
Improving language understanding by generative pre-training. (2018).
[24] Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya
Sutskever. 2019. Language Models are Unsupervised Multitask Learners. (2019).
[25] Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Sumit Chopra, Michael Auli, and Wojciech Zaremba. 2016.
Sequence Level Training with Recurrent Neural Networks. In 4th International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2016, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May
2-4, 2016, Conference Track Proceedings , Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun (Eds.).
http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06732
[26] Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie, and Jonathan Berant. 2019. Com-
monsenseQA: A Question Answering Challenge Targeting Commonsense Knowl-
edge. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-
HLT 2019, Minneapolis, MN, USA, June 2-7, 2019, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) ,
Jill Burstein, Christy Doran, and Thamar Solorio (Eds.). Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics, 4149–4158. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/n19-1421
[27] Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos
Guestrin, Percy Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. 2023. Stanford Alpaca: An
Instruction-following LLaMA model. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford_
alpaca.
[28] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne
Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal
Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lam-
ple. 2023. LLaMA: Open and Efficient Foundation Language Models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.13971 (2023).
[29] Lewis Tunstall, Leandro Von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. 2022. Natural language
processing with transformers . " O’Reilly Media, Inc.".
[30] Wenhan Wang, Ge Li, Sijie Shen, Xin Xia, and Zhi Jin. 2020. Modular Tree
Network for Source Code Representation Learning. 29, 4, Article 31 (sep 2020),
23 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3409331
[31] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc V. Le, Ed H. Chi, Sharan Narang,
Aakanksha Chowdhery, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Self-Consistency Improves
Chain of Thought Reasoning in Language Models. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 .
OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/pdf?id=1PL1NIMMrw
[32] Yizhong Wang, Yeganeh Kordi, Swaroop Mishra, Alisa Liu, Noah A. Smith,
Daniel Khashabi, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. Self-Instruct: Aligning Lan-
guage Models with Self-Generated Instructions. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Pa-
pers) . Association for Computational Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, 13484–13508.
https://aclanthology.org/2023.acl-long.754
[33] Yue Wang, Hung Le, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Nghi DQ Bui, Junnan Li, and
Steven CH Hoi. 2023. Codet5+: Open code large language models for code
understanding and generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07922 (2023).
[34] Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian
Lester, Nan Du, Andrew M. Dai, and Quoc V Le. 2022. Finetuned Language Models
are Zero-Shot Learners. In International Conference on Learning Representations .
https://openreview.net/forum?id=gEZrGCozdqR
[35] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia,
Ed H. Chi, Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022. Chain of Thought Prompting Elicits
Reasoning in Large Language Models. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems , Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun

--- PAGE 12 ---
Conference’17, July 2017, Washington, DC, USA Jia Li♂, Ge Li, Yongmin Li, and Zhi Jin
Cho (Eds.). https://openreview.net/forum?id=_VjQlMeSB_J
[36] Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng,
Chongyang Tao, and Daxin Jiang. 2023. Wizardlm: Empowering large language
models to follow complex instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12244 (2023).
[37] Jian Zhang, Xu Wang, Hongyu Zhang, Hailong Sun, Kaixuan Wang, and Xudong
Liu. 2019. A novel neural source code representation based on abstract syntax tree.
InProceedings of the 41st International Conference on Software Engineering, ICSE
2019, Montreal, QC, Canada, May 25-31, 2019 , Joanne M. Atlee, Tevfik Bultan, and
Jon Whittle (Eds.). IEEE / ACM, 783–794. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICSE.2019.00086
[38] Kechi Zhang, Zhuo Li, Jia Li, Ge Li, and Zhi Jin. 2023. Self-Edit: Fault-Aware
Code Editor for Code Generation. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), ACL
2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023 , Anna Rogers, Jordan L. Boyd-Graber,
and Naoaki Okazaki (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, 769–787.https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-long.45
[39] Zihao Zhao, Eric Wallace, Shi Feng, Dan Klein, and Sameer Singh. 2021. Calibrate
before use: Improving few-shot performance of language models. In International
Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 12697–12706.
[40] Qinkai Zheng, Xiao Xia, Xu Zou, Yuxiao Dong, Shan Wang, Yufei Xue, Zihan
Wang, Lei Shen, Andi Wang, Yang Li, Teng Su, Zhilin Yang, and Jie Tang. 2023.
CodeGeeX: A Pre-Trained Model for Code Generation with Multilingual Evalua-
tions on HumanEval-X. arXiv:2303.17568 [cs.LG]
[41] Denny Zhou, Nathanael Schärli, Le Hou, Jason Wei, Nathan Scales, Xuezhi Wang,
Dale Schuurmans, Claire Cui, Olivier Bousquet, Quoc V. Le, and Ed H. Chi. 2023.
Least-to-Most Prompting Enables Complex Reasoning in Large Language Models.
InThe Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023,
Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023 . OpenReview.net. https://openreview.net/pdf?id=
WZH7099tgfM
