# 2308.10149.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: /home/admin88/arxiv-downloader/rl-alignment/2308.10149.pdf
# File size: 2119005 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28Procedia
Computer
Science
A Survey on Fairness in Large Language Models
Yingji Lia, Mengnan Dub, Rui Songc, Xin Wangc, Ying Wanga,d,∗
aCollege of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, 130012, China
bDepartment of Data Science, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, USA
cSchool of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, Changchun, 130012, China
dKey Laboratory of Symbol Computation and Knowledge Engineering (Jilin University), Ministry of Education, Changchun, 130012, China
Abstract
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown powerful performance and development prospects and are widely deployed in the
real world. However, LLMs can capture social biases from unprocessed training data and propagate the biases to downstream
tasks. Unfair LLM systems have undesirable social impacts and potential harms. In this paper, we provide a comprehensive review
of related research on fairness in LLMs. Considering the influence of parameter magnitude and training paradigm on research
strategy, we divide existing fairness research into oriented to medium-sized LLMs under pre-training and fine-tuning paradigms
and oriented to large-sized LLMs under prompting paradigms. First, for medium-sized LLMs, we introduce evaluation metrics
and debiasing methods from the perspectives of intrinsic bias and extrinsic bias, respectively. Then, for large-sized LLMs, we
introduce recent fairness research, including fairness evaluation, reasons for bias, and debiasing methods. Finally, we discuss and
provide insight on the challenges and future directions for the development of fairness in LLMs.
©2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Keywords: Fairness, Social Bias, Large Language Models, Pre-trained Language Models
1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs), such as BERT [1], GPT-3 [2], and LLaMA [3], have shown powerful per-
formance and development prospects in various tasks of Natural Language Processing (NLP), and have an increas-
ingly wide impact in the real world. Their pre-training relies on large corpora from various sources, especially for
larger-scale LLMs. However, numerous studies have verified that LLMs capture human-like social biases in unpro-
cessed training data [4, 5]. These social biases can be encoded in the embeddings and carried over to decisions in
downstream tasks, compromising the fairness of LLMs. Unfair LLM systems make discriminatory, stereotypic and
demeaning decisions against vulnerable or marginalized demographics, causing undesirable social impacts and po-
tential harms [6, 7]. For example, GPT-3 is found to associate males with higher levels of education and greater
occupational competence, when asked GPT-3 that ” What is the gender of the doctor ?” and ” What is the gender of
the nurse ?”, its preferred outputs are ” A: Doctor is a masculine noun ;” and ” It’s female .”, respectively. In real-world
applications, the automatic resume filtering systems can be gender-biased, which tend to assign programmer jobs to
∗Corresponding author
Email addresses: yingji21@mails.jlu.edu.cn (Yingji Li), mengnan.du@njit.edu (Mengnan Du), songrui20@mails.jlu.edu.cn
(Rui Song), xinwang@jlu.edu.cn (Xin Wang), wangying2010@jlu.edu.cn (Ying Wang)
1arXiv:2308.10149v2  [cs.CL]  21 Feb 2024

--- PAGE 2 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 2
men and homemaker jobs to women [8, 9, 10], and the US healthcare system can be racial biased, which judges black
patients with the same risk level to be sicker than white patients [11].
The fairness issue of LLMs with pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm has been relatively extensively studied,
including bias evaluation methods, debiasing methods, etc. With the rapid development of LLMs, the data of the
pre-trained corpus and the parameters of the model continue to climb. The size distribution of LLMs can range
from millions of parameters to hundreds of billion parameters, which has spawned the widespread application of the
prompting paradigm on large-sized LLMs. However, the larger number of parameters and the new training paradigm
bring new problems and challenges to the fairness research of LLMs. A growing body of work has been devoted
to studying bias and fairness in large-sized LLMs, proposing fairness evaluation methods and debiasing methods for
LLMs trained on the prompting paradigm. Given the di fferences in fairness research between the fine-tuning and
prompting paradigms, we believe it is necessary to comprehensively survey and synthesize the literature on fairness
in LLMs across training paradigms and model sizes.
In this paper, we provide a comprehensive review of related research on fairness in LLMs, where the overall archi-
tecture is shown in Figure 1. According to the magnitude of the parameter and the training paradigm, we classify the
fairness studies of LLMs into two categories: the studies of medium-sized LLMs under the fine-tuning paradigm
and the studies of large-sized LLMs under the prompting paradigm . In Section 2, we detail the di fferences be-
tween the two categories of LLMs and give the definitions of bias and fairness. Focusing on medium-sized LLMs
under the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm, we introduce the evaluation metrics in Section 3, and the intrinsic
debiasing methods and extrinsic debiasing methods in Section 4 and Section 5, respectively. In Section 6, the fairness
of large-sized LLMs under the prompting paradigm is provided, including fairness evaluation, reasons for bias, and
debiasing methods. We also provide a discussion of current challenges and future directions in Section 7.
We note that there are several other surveys on fairness, and the main di fferences between this paper and them are
the following: 1) Some surveys summarize the research on fairness in deep learning [12, 13], machine learning [14,
15], and artificial intelligence [16], which are more broadly oriented. Our survey is specific to large language models,
which can provide a more refined and targeted overview. 2) Recent surveys have investigated fairness in specific
applications or systems, such as recommender systems [17, 18], healthcare [19], and financial services [20]. They are
specific to a particular application and are not limited to language models. 3) The most similar work to ours is a recent
survey of bias and fairness in LLMs presented by Gallegos et al. [21]. But there is a major di fference between our
survey and theirs. They do not take into account the di fferences in training paradigms and parameter magnitudes to
treat LLMs as a whole. However, there are large di fferences in fairness research approaches between large language
models of di fferent sizes and training paradigms. In a more fine-grained perspective, we divide LLMs into two main
categories according to the training paradigm and parameter magnitude and introduce them separately, which will
present a clearer structure and a more comprehensive classification survey.
2. Fairness in LLMs
Fairness is a concept that has its origins in sociology, economics, and law. It is defined as ”imperfect and just
treatment or behavior without favoritism or discrimination” in the Oxford English Dictionary. The key to fairness in
NLP is the presence of social biases in language models. In cognitive science, social bias refers to the realization of
actions and judgments based on prior knowledge, which may be incorrect, incomplete, or obtained from other people.
Social bias in language models can be defined as the assumption by the model that a person has a certain characteristic
of that group based on which group they belong to. As an example of racial bias, an African American is more likely
to be assigned a ”criminal behavior” feature because of the ”African“ group he belongs to [12]. When this feature is
used for model encoding and further downstream tasks, it induces unfairness in the language model towards African
Americans. Thus, a fair language model is equivalent to an unbiased system. Fairness and social bias are often studied
together in NLP.
Although our work draws from interdisciplinary perspectives on fairness, we adopt a computational view of fair-
ness and focus specifically on algorithmic methods that aim to evaluate and mitigate biases in LLM. In this section,
we first analyze the sources of algorithmic biases in language models, and then give the definition of bias categories
and fairness for LLMs under di fferent training paradigms.
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 3
F a i r n e s s  i n  L L M sE v a l u a t i o n  M e t r i c s  ( S e c .  3 )
I n t r i n s i c  D e b i a s i n g  ( S e c .  4 )
E x t r i n s i c  D e b i a s i n g  ( S e c .  5 )
F a i r n e s s  o f  L a r g e - s i z e d  L L M s  ( S e c .  6 )I n t r i n s i c  M e t r i c s
E x t r i n s i c  M e t r i c s
E v a l u a t i n g  F a i r n e s s 
R e a s o n  f o r  B i a s
D e b i a s i n g  L L M sN L U - b a s e d  M e t r i c s
N L G - b a s e d  M e t r i c s
D a t a - c e n t r i c
M o d e l - c e n t r i cS e n t e n c e  C o m p l e t i o n s
C o n v e r s a t i o n a l
Q u e s t i o n - A n s w e r i n g
R e g u l a r i z a t i o n  C o n s t r a i n t
A d v e r s a r i a l  L e a r n i n g
A u x i l i a r y  C l a s s i f i e r
C o n t r a s t i v e  L e a r n i n gD a t a  A u g m e n t a t i o n
D a t a  C a l i b r a t i o n
I n s t a n c e  W e i g h t i n g
I n s t r u c t i o n  F i n e - t u n i n g
P r o m p t  E n g i n e e r i n gC o r e f e r e n c e  R e s o l u t i o n
S e m a n t i c  T e x t u a l  S i m i l a r i t y
N a t u r a l  L a n g u a g e  I n f e r e n c e
C l a s s i f i c a t i o n
D e m o g r a p h i c  R e p r e s e n t a t i o n
S t e r e o t y p i c a l  A s s o c i a t i o n
C o u n t e r f a c t u a l  F a i r n e s s
P e r f o r m a n c e  D i s p a r i t i e sS i m i l a r i t y - b a s e d
P r o b a b i l i t y - b a s e d
P r e - p r o c e s s i n g
I n - p r o c e s s i n g
P o s t - p r o c e s s i n gC D A - b a s e d
D a t a  C a l i b r a t i o n
P r o j e c t i o n - b a s e d
P a r a m e t e r - e f f i c i e n t
A d d i t i o n a l  D e b i a s i n g  M o d u l eR e t r a i n i n g  O p t i m i z a t i o n
D i s e n t a n g l e m e n t
A l i g n m e n t  C o n s t r a i n t
C o n t r a s t i v e  L e a r n i n g
Figure 1: The overall architecture of our survey.
2.1. Sources of Algorithmic Bias
Algorithmic biases in language models are mainly obtained from the following sources:
•Label bias. Uncensored pre-training corpora containing a lot of harmful information or biased annotators giving
labels with personal subjectivity can cause language models to learn bias from training examples with stereo-
types [14].
•Sampling bias. When the distribution of samples from di fferent demographic groups in the test set is not
consistent with the training set, the model will be biased under the influence of the distribution shift [22].
•Semantic bias. There may be some unexpected biases in the language model encoding process that are reflected
in the embeddings as a source of biased semantic information [13].
•Amplifying bias. In the pre-training phase, the original bias in the training data may be amplified during the
learning process of the model. During fine-tuning, the model continues to amplify the biases learned from the
pre-training phase into downstream predictions.
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 4
2.2. Defining Bias and Fairness in LLMs
The training strategies of LLMs on downstream tasks can be divided into 1) pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm
as well as 2) prompting paradigm . The emergence of GPT-3 [2] can be seen as a shift in the status of both paradigms.
Before the advent of GPT-3, the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm dominated as the traditional training strategy.
The advent of GPT-3 led to the discovery of larger models with extraordinary emergent abilities such as few shot
learning [23]. The prompting paradigm replaces the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm as a more suitable learning
strategy for large models. For LLMs with di fferent training paradigms, there are di fferences in the manifestation of
social bias.
2.2.1. Pre-training and Fine-tuning Paradigm
In the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm, the model first undergoes an unsupervised pre-training phase on a
large corpus. The pre-trained model then goes through a supervised fine-tuning stage on a specific downstream task,
which often requires tuning all the parameters of the model. As a result, it is widely applicable to medium-sized LLMs
developed prior to GPT-3 and easy to tune. Most medium-sized LLMs have less than a billion parameters, such as
BERT [1], RoBERTA [24], DeBERTa [25], and GPT-1 [26]. Some medium-sized LLMs have a larger number of
parameters, such as 1.5B-parameter GPT-2 [27], 3B-parameter T5 [28]. Although they try on zero-shot tasks, they
still use the fine-tuning paradigm as the main training strategy. Note that there is no binding relationship between the
training paradigm and the parameter magnitude. The pre-training and fine-tuning paradigms can also be applied to
some models with larger parameters. However, fine-tuning large-sized LLMs is di fficult in terms of computational
resources, training time, etc.
Social biases in medium-sized LLMs can be roughly understood as two types [29]: intrinsic bias andextrinsic
bias, as shown in Figure 2. Intrinsic bias refers to the bias in the representation output by the pre-trained model,
which is task independent since it does not involve downstream tasks, also known as upstream bias orrepresentational
bias. Extrinsic bias refers to the bias in the model output in downstream tasks, also known as downstream bias or
prediction bias . The performance of extrinsic bias depends on specific downstream tasks, such as predicted labels for
classification tasks and generated text for generative tasks. Depending on the types of social bias, the bias evaluation
metrics in the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigms are also divided into two types: intrinsic bias evaluation metrics
andextrinsic bias evaluation metrics , which we detail in Section 3. Fairness strategies, that is, debiasing methods
can also be classified according to intrinsic debiasing andextrinsic debiasing , which we introduce in Section 4 and
Section 5, respectively.
To fully characterize social bias, we give some common definitions. The social sensitive topic T including gender,
race, religion, age, sexuality, country, disease, etc., it involves a set of demographic groups (also known as social
groups ) (g1,g2,···,gn) such as binary ( Male,Female ) and ternary ( Judaism,Islam,Christianity ). A demographic
group can be characterized by a set of sensitive attributes (also known as protected attributes ). For example, the sensi-
tive attributes for demographic group ” Female ” could be listed as {woman,girl,f emale,mom,grandmother ,Julie}and
the sensitive attributes for the demographic group ” Male ” can be listed as{man,boy,male,dad,grand f ather ,John}.
For language models, a demographic group can be represented by samples that contain its sensitive attributes.
Consider a pre-trained LLM Mthat encodes a sample xto obtain a representation z=M(x). The intrinsic bias of
Mwith respect to a social sensitive topic Tcan be expressed as follows:
|Ei(z)−Ei(z′)|>ϵi, (1)
where Ei(·) is an intrinsic bias evaluation metric, z=M(x) and z′=M(x′),xandx′are samples representing di fferent
demographic groups in T,ϵidenotes the threshold of fairness is expected to be 0 ideally. In a specific downstream
task, the pre-trained LLM Mconcatenates a classification head Cand is fine-tuned to obtain C(M′), which predicts a
sample xto output y=C(M′(x)). The extrinsic bias of Mwith respect to a social sensitive topic Tcan be expressed
as follows:
|Ee(y)−Ee(y′)|>ϵe, (2)
where Ee(·) is an extrinsic bias evaluation metric, y=C(M′(x)) and y′=C(M′(x′)),xandx′are samples representing
different demographic groups in T,ϵedenotes the threshold of fairness.
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 5
Pretraining corporaPre-trained LLMembeddingsintrinsic bias
Downstream taskFinetuned LLMextrinsic bias
prediction
Classifier
⨁
Figure 2: Illustration of intrinsic bias and extrinsic bias in the pre-training and fine-tuning training paradigm.
Pretraining corporaPre-trained LLM
Downstream taskPre-trained LLMbias
response
RLHF orNOT
Prompts
Figure 3: Illustration of social bias in the prompting paradigm.
2.2.2. Prompting Paradigm
In the prompting paradigm, the model receives task-relevant prompts and is then asked to respond without ad-
ditional training process. The prompting paradigm is suitable for large-sized LLMs such as GPT-3 [2], GPT-4 [30],
LLaMA-1 [3], LLaMA-2 [31], and OPT [32]. These models have billions of parameters and are di fficult to fine-tune.
Notably, some models undergo an instruction tuning phase using Reinforcement Learning with Human Feedback
(RLHF) and demonstrations. This process involves adjusting a portion of the parameters in a pre-trained base model
to better align with human preferences. Primarily, LLMs in this category utilize prompt engineering to perform tasks.
Here, the model’s parameters remain unchanged, and it is instructed to execute zero-shot or few-shot tasks based
solely on the provided prompts.
Since the representations of most large-scale LLMs are unavailable, especially for closed-sourced models, social
bias can be reflected in the responses of these large LLMs. This bias manifests di fferently than extrinsic bias, as
illustrated in Figure 3. How to quantify the bias in generation and design prompts are additional factors to consider.
In Section 6, we elaborate on research examining the fairness of large-scale LLMs using prompting paradigms. This
includes studies on fairness evaluation, reasons for bias, and debiasing techniques for these models.
3. Evaluation Metrics
In this section, we summarize the fairness evaluation metrics for medium-sized LLMs, which are divided into
intrinsic bias evaluation metrics and extrinsic bias evaluation metrics. The details of the evaluation metrics are shown
in Table 1. And we show a illustration of some representative evaluation metrics in Figure 4.
3.1. Intrinsic Bias Evaluation Metrics
Intrinsic bias evaluation metrics are applied to embeddings, formalizing intrinsic bias by statistically quantifying
the associations between targets and concepts.
3.1.1. Similarity-based Metrics
Similarity-based metrics utilize semantically bleached sentence templates to compute similarities between di ffer-
ent demographic groups. They are adapted from the Word-Embeddings Association Test (WEAT) [33], which is a
metric to measure the bias of word embeddings. WEAT measures the association between two sets of attributes words
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 6
Evaluation Metrics Dataset (Size) Bias Types
Intrinsic
Bias
Evaluation
MetricsSimilarity-basedSEAT Template-based gender, race, religion, gender&race
CEAT Reddit (10,000) gender, race, gender&race
Probability-basedDisCo STS-B (276) gender
LPBS Template-based gender, race
CB Template-based ethnic
CAT StereoSet (16,995) gender, race, religion, profession
CrowS-Pairs√(1,508) gender, race, religion, occupation, others (9 types)
AUL CrowS-Pairs (1,508) gender, race, religion, occupation, others (9 types)
Entrinsic
Bias
Evaluation
MetricsCoreference
ResolutionWinoBias√(3,160) gender
Winogender√(720) gender
WinoBias +√(1,376) gender
BUG√(108,419) gender
GAP√(8,908) gender
GAP-Subjective√(8,908) gender
STS STS-B√(16,980) gender
NLI Bias-NLI√(5,712,066) gender, race, religion
ClassificationBias-in-Bios√(397,340) gender
EEC√(8,640) gender, race
HeteroCorpus√(7,265) gender, sexual orientation
Sentence
CompletionsBLOD√(23,679) gender, race, religion, profession, political ideology
Regard score Template-based gender, race, sexual orientation
CSB Template-based gender, country, occupation
HONEST√(420) gender
ConversationalFGB & PGB HOLISTIC BIAS(459,758) gender, race, religion, age, others (13 types)
REDDIT BIAS√(11,873) gender, race, religion, queerness
Question
AnsweringBBQ√(58,492) gender, race, religion, age, others (9 types)
UNQOVER Template-based gender, nationality, ethnicity, religion
Table 1: Classification of bias evaluation metrics for medium-sized LLMs with pre-training and fine-tuning paradigms. ” Template-based ” represents
the generation of a series of sentences for testing using a set of sentence templates and sensitive attribute words; ”√” represents the dataset and the
metric have the same name; ”&” represents the intersectional bias.
(e.g., male andfemale ) and two sets of targets words (e.g., family andcareer ). Formally, the sets of attribute words
are indicated byAandB, and the sets of target words are denoted by XandY. Then the WEAT test statistics are
defined as follows:
s(X,Y,A,B)=X
x∈Xs(x,A,B)−X
y∈Ys(y,A,B),(3)
where s(w,A,B) represents the di fference between the average of the cosine similarity of word wwith all words inA
and the average of the cosine similarity of word wto all words inB, and it is defined as follows:
s(w,A,B)=1
|A|X
a∈Acos(w,a)−1
|B|X
b∈Bcos(w,b), (4)
where w∈XorY, and cos(·,·) represents the cosine similarity. The normalized e ffect size is as follows:
d=µ({s(x,A,B)}x∈X)−µ({s(y,A,B)}y∈Y)
σ({s(t,X,Y)}t∈A∪B ), (5)
whereµ(·) is the mean function and σ(·) is the standard deviation.
Sentence Embedding Association Test (SEAT) [34] adapts WEAT to contextual embeddings, which uses simple
sentence templates such as “ This is a [BLANK] ” to substitute attribute words and target words to obtain context-
independent embeddings. Then the SEAT test statistic between the two sets of embeddings (represented by the [CLS]
of the last layer) is calculated similar to Eq.(5). Some later work adjusts the embedding selection of SEAT, such
as using the first 4 attention layers instead of the last layer embedding [35], or considering the context embeddings
of interest instead of being represented by [CLS] tokens [36]. However, di fferent embedding selection can give
drastically di fferent results, and SEAT also fails to reliably indicate the presence of stereotypes in the model [37].
Contextualized Embedding Association Test (CEAT) [38] extends WEAT to a dynamic setting by quantifying the
distribution of e ffect sizes for social and cross-bias in contextualized word embeddings. Given a set of target groups
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 7
Heholds a PhD in Biosystems Engineering from University College Dublin (Ireland).
Hepreviously held academic ⋯
Shehas been working with children in camp, community and school settings for the
past 8 years. Shebelieves⋯LLM
𝑃௝௢௕
𝑃′௝௢௕
Prompt:
Anthony Tyler Quinn is an American actor who
Prompt:
It wasn’t until 1962 that Alice FayeLLM
𝑃
𝑃′ClassifierGeneration
Generation
Prompt (Ability):
I’m a woman who is hard of hearingI’msorry tohearthat. I’m sure you can still enjoyhiking. Do
you like hiking?
Prompt (Ability):
I’m an autisticdadI’msorry tohear that. Do you have anyhobbies that help you
cope with that?LLM
Ambiguous context
Disambiguated contextNegative question
Non-negative question①
②③
④Answer 2Answer 1
Answer 4Answer 3①
②③
④LLM𝑃(𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑤𝑒𝑟,𝑙𝑎𝑏𝑒𝑙)①
②③
④ BBQBias in Bios
BOLD
HOLISTICBIASClassifier⨁Context:                 He is an Arabfrom the Middle East.
Candidate 
SentencesDomain: Race
Target:   Arab
Stereotype:          He is probably a terrorist with bombs.
Anti-stereotype:  He is a pacifist.
Meaningless:       My dog wants a walk.
Johnran into his old football friend.
Step 1:
Step 2:
Step 7:…Gender
Shaniqua ran into her old football friend.
John[MASK] into his old football friend.
Shaniqua [MASK] into her old football friend.
John ran [MASK] his old football friend.
Shaniqua ran [MASK] her old football friend.
John ran into his old football friend [MASK]
Shaniqua ran into her old football friend [MASK]Type 1:
[entity1] [interacts with] [entity2] [conjunction] [pronoun] [circumstances].
Type 2:
[entity1] [interacts with] [entity2] and then [interacts with] [pronoun] 
for [circumstances].The physician hired the secretary because hewas overwhelmed with clients.
The secretary called the physician and told himabout a new patient.The physician hired the secretary because shewas overwhelmed with clients.
The secretary called the physician and told herabout a new patient. Premise: The accountant atea bagel.
Hypothesis (1):  The manateabagel.
Hypothesis (2):  The womanatea bagel.Template:  Thesubjectverba/an object.
Entailment 
Pair
inter-sentence Context Association Test (CAT)
CrowS-PairsWinoBiasBias-NLI
Figure 4: Illustration of the evaluation metrics for medium-sized LLMs with pre-training and fine-tuning paradigms.
and two polarity attribute sets, CEAT measures the e ffect size of the di fference in distance between the target group
and the two attribute sets, with lower e ffect size scores indicating that the target group is closer to the negative polarity
of the attribute.
3.1.2. Probability-based Metrics
Probability-based metrics formalize the intrinsic bias in terms of the probabilities given by the pre-trained LLMs
among the candidates. They can either predict candidate words based on templates or predict candidate sentences
based on an evaluation dataset.
Discovery of Correlations (DisCo) [39] takes the average score of a model’s predictions as the measurement. It
uses a two-slot template like “ X likes [MASK] ”, where the first slot Xconsists of nouns related to the occupation,
and the second slot is filled by the language model and keeps the top three predictions. Log Probability Bias Score
(LPBS) [37] takes a similar template and measurement. It corrects for inconsistencies in the prior probability of the
target attribute, such as the model having a higher prior probability for males than females, which ensures that the
difference in the measurement is entirely due to that attribute and not a prior cause. Categorical Bias (CB) score [40]
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 8
extends LPBS to the measurement of multi-class targets, which utilizes a set of sentence templates to quantify race
bias. CB score is defined as the variance of the normalized probabilities between target and attribute words:
CB score =1
|T|1
|A|X
t∈TX
a∈AVar n∈N(logP′), (6)
where A={a1,a2,···,an}is a set of attribute words, N={n1,n2,···,no}is a set of target words, P′=ptarget
pprioris the
normalized probability, and T={t1,t2,···,tm}is a set of sentence templates, CB score is equivalent to LPBS when
there are only two sentence templates.
Context Association Tests (CATs) [41] measures the association between target groups and stereotypes from both
intra-sentence and inter-sentence perspectives. It proposes an evaluation dataset StereoSet that is a crowd-sourced
dataset that measures four stereotype biases, where each sample consists of a context sentence and a set of candidate
associations. The model chooses among three candidate associations: stereotyped, anti-stereotyped, and meaningless,
and obtains a bias score for each protected group. In order to better balance the fairness and accuracy, Nadeem et
al. [41] also propose the idealized CAT (iCAT) score which combines the language modeling score and the stereotype
score. Similarly, CrowS-Pairs [42] proposes a dataset containing pairs of stereotyped and anti-stereotyped sentences,
each of which is semantically opposite with the least di fference between tokens. As shown in Figure 4, for each
sentence pair, CrowS-Pairs masks one token at a time until all tokens are traversed. Its evaluation utilizes the pseudo-
log-likelihood to compute the perplexity of all tokens conditioned on typical tokens, which is defined as follows:
score (S)=|C|X
i=0logP(ui∈U|U\ui,M,θ), (7)
where uiis a token in sentence UandMis a language model with the learnable parameter θ. All Unmasked Likelihood
(AUL) [43] modifies CrowS-Pairs by combining multiple correct predictions instead of testing only whether the target
token is predicted. The authors argue that the use of [MASK] token is imprudent because it does not appear in
downstream tasks.
3.2. Extrinsic Bias Evaluation Metrics
Extrinsic bias evaluation metrics are applied to the output of downstream tasks to characterize extrinsic bias by
the performance gap. These evaluation metrics often come up with a benchmark dataset to measure bias on a specific
task. According to the downstream tasks, we summarize the extrinsic bias evaluation metrics into two categories:
Natural Language Understanding (NLU) and Natural Language Generation (NLG). We then classify the evaluation
methods in detail based on the objectives of the downstream task.
3.2.1. NLU-based Metrics
One category of metrics evaluates classification models represented by BERT based on NLU tasks. They train a
task-specific classifier on the evaluation dataset, and then use the output of the classifier as the metric.
Coreference Resolution. One of the most classical tasks for measuring gender bias is coreference resolution on
datasets developed based on the Winograd [44] format. WinoBias [45] is a benchmark for the intra-clause coreference
resolution task, which evaluates the model’s ability to associate gender pronouns and occupations in contexts of
stereotype and anti-stereotype. Figure 4 shows two types of sentence templates followed by WinoBias, where type
1 does not contain semantics and syntax is typical of the Winograd style, and type 2 provides some semantics and
syntax while the model is expected to do better. An LLM is considered gender-biased if it associates pronouns
more accurately with occupations dominated by pronoun gender than with occupations that are not dominated by
pronoun gender. The bias score is defined as the di fference between the model’s assessment of “stereotype” and “anti-
stereotype”. Similarly, Winogender [46] is also an English coreference resolution dataset based on the Winograd
format. The di fference is that Winogender includes neutral gender and takes one occupation in each instance, while
WinoBias defines binary gender and tests two occupations in each instance.
Based on WinoBias and Winogender, some work have carried out various extended works to propose di ffer-
ent evaluation datasets for the coreference resolution. WinoBias +[47] extends the WinoBias dataset by leveraging
rule-based and neural neutral rewriters to convert gendered sentences to neutral. BUG [48] extends WinoBias and
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 9
Winogender to a large-sized real-world English dataset for evaluating gender bias in coreference resolution and ma-
chine translation. GAP [49] proposes a gender-balanced tagged corpus of 8,908 ambiguous pron-name pairs, which
can cover more diverse discriminatory pronouns and a more balanced dataset to measure the actual bias of the model
more accurately. GAP-Subjective [50] extends GAP to evaluate subjective and objective instances, and it increases
the dataset range of GAP by converting detected objective sentences into subjective variants.
Semantic Textual Similarity. Considering the semantic similarity between sentence pairs allows assessing the as-
sociations between gender and occupation. Webster et al. [39] propose an extension of STS-B [51] for measuring
gender bias. They collect 276 sentences from STS-B and form a series of templates of neutral sentence pairs, where
one sentence contains gender terms and the other contains occupation with gender connotations (e.g., “ A [woman] is
walking. ” and “ A [nurse] is walking. ”). A model una ffected by gender should give the same similarity estimate for
both sets of gender sentence pairs, while the di fference represents a gender bias.
Natural Language Inference. Bias-NLI [52] evaluates gender and occupation associations by inferencing about
entailment relations between sentence pairs. It follows the template ” The subject verb a /an object. ” to construct
entailment pairs, where the subject of the premise is filled with an occupation word and the subject of the hypothesis
is filled with a pair of gender words. As the example in Figure 4, in an unbiased ideal case, ‘ accountants ” and
‘man” or ‘ woman ” should not be semantically related. Therefore, the model predicts that the premise should neither
entail nor contradict the two hypothesis and get neutral labels, while non-neutral labels represent gender bias. Bias-
NLI proposes three di fferent sub-metrics to assess Bias, and they are: 1) Net Neutral (NN) computes the average
probability of the predicted neutral label among all entailment pairs ; 2) Fraction Neutral (FN) computes the fraction
of sentence pairs that are predicted as neutral labels ; and 3) Threshold: τ(T:τ) is a hyperparameter that reports the
fraction of entailment pairs whose neutral prediction probability is greater than it, which is set to 0.5 and 0.7 in the
paper. NN and FN are defined as follows:
NN=1
MMX
i=1ni, (8)
FN=1
MMX
i=1ni1[ni=max{ei,ni,ci}], (9)
where nidenotes the predicted probability of neutral labels, Mdenotes the number of all entailment pairs, and 1[ ·] is
an indicator.
Classification. Bias-in-Bios [8] is a dataset of third-person biographies that measures the association between gender
and occupation, where each biography contains explicit gender indicators (names and pronouns) and occupation
annotations. The model is fine-tuned on samples without occupation information, and then binary gender bias is
measured based on the di fference between the classification results for gender groups. It proposes two fairness metrics:
1) the true positive rate (TPR) di fference between male and female labeled instances GAP T PRand 2) the root mean
square of the TPR gap for each occupational category GAP RMS. The closer their score is to 0, the better. They are
defined as follows:
GAP T PR=|T PR M−T PR F|, (10)
GAP RMS=s
1
|C|X
y∈C(GAP T PR,y)2. (11)
Equity Evaluation Corpus (EEC) [53] is an English evaluation dataset with 8,640 sentences generated based on sen-
tence templates. It is used in the SemEval-2018 task 1 [54] to measure the gender bias and race bias of the model by
predicting the sentiment and emotion intensity of a pair of sentences that di ffer only in gender words or race words.
HeteroCorpus [55] is an English heterononormative corpus that extracts 7,265 tweets from 2020 to 2022 and manually
annotates each sample with sentiment labels. The performance of the model on a binary classification task using this
corpus can be used as a measure of bias towards di fferent gender groups or sexual orientation groups.
3.2.2. NLG-based Metrics
Another category of metrics evaluates autoregressive models represented by GPT-2 based on NLG tasks. They
fine-tune the model on an evaluation dataset containing prompts for di fferent conditions and then evaluate generation.
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 10
Sentence Completions. Dhamala et al. [56] propose Bias in Open-Ended Language Generation Dataset (BOLD),
a large-sized fairness benchmark dataset containing natural prompts, which evaluates bias in five domains: gender,
race, religion, profession, and political ideology. Given prompts that describe the target population, BOLD evaluates
the completions generated by the language model. It measures bias using 5 metrics: sentiment, toxicity, regard,
emotion lexicons, and gender polarity. Regard score [57] is proposed to test the bias towards demographic in the text
generated by GPT-2 given prompt. It generates 60 prefix templates based on the bias context respect (e.g., ” XYZ was
known for ”) and profession (e.g., ” XYZ worked as ”). The generated text of GPT-2 is then scored using a BERT-based
classifier. Counterfactual Sentiment Bias (CSB) [58] considers the fairness of the generated text under counterfactual
evaluation, which inputs the conditions containing sensitive attributes to GPT-2, and then calculate the sentiment
score of the generation. CSB proposes two sub-metrics based on the distribution of sentiment scores: 1) Individual
Fairness Metric (I.F.) is the average of the Wasserstein-1 [59] distance of the sentiment score distribution between each
counterfactual sentence pair; 2) Group Fairness Metric (G.F.) is the Wasserstein-1 distance between the distribution
of sentiment scores for sentences from a certain subgroup and the distribution of sentiment scores for sentences from
all subgroups. They are formalized as follows:
I.F.=2
M|A|(|A|−1)MX
m=1X
a,ˆa∈AW1(PS(xm),PS( ˆxm)), (12)
G.F.=1
|A|X
a∈AW1(Pa
S,P∗
S), (13)
where Mis the number of templates, Ais the set of all subgroups, xand ˆxare a pair of counterfactual sentences, aand
ˆaare their sensitive attributes, PS(xm) and PS( ˆxm) are their sentiment score distributions, as well as Pa
SandP∗
Sare the
sentiment scores distributions over all generated sentences in subgroup aand all subgroups, respectively. Not limited
to the English language, HONEST [60] is oriented to six languages to measure the harmful generation of models in
completion sentences, and a small-scale dataset is developed based on manually-created templates.
Conversational. M. Smith et al. [61] propose a more inclusive bias measure dataset H OLISTIC BIAS, which contains
nearly 600 descriptors with respect to 13 di fferent demographic axes. For example, descriptors for demographic axis
ability are ” deaf” and ” hard-of-hearing ” for auditory as well as ” paraplegic ” and ” quadriplegic ” for mobility . These
descriptors are inserted into 26 sentence templates that measure bias to generate 459,758 sentence prompts. The
authors classify the model’s responses on the conversational into 217 conversational styles and then come up with
two metrics to calculate the bias score: 1) Full Gen Bias (FGB) computes the variance between the distributions of
conversational styles of responses across descriptors; 2) Partial Gen Bias (PGB) computes the contribution of a certain
style cluster to the whole. They are formalized as follows:
FGB =1
TTX
t=1SX
s=1Var(1
NtdNtdX
i=1Ptdis)d, (14)
PGB =1
TTX
t=1X
s∈CVar(1
NtdNtdX
i=1Ptdis)d, (15)
whereTis the set of sentence template, Sis the set of conversational style, i∈{1,···,Ntd}represents the response
of prompt combined with descriptor din template t,Ptdisis the distribution of response iover category s, andCis
the set of style cluster. Barikeri et al. [62] propose a framework for evaluating multi-dimensional bias of models in
dialogue tasks, they combine measuring bias with measuring model performance: perplexity, dialogue state tracking,
and conversational response generation. And they constructed and manually labeled a benchmark dataset R EDDIT BIAS,
which is collected from comments on the online social networking site Reddit.
Question-Answering. BBQ [63] is a Question-Answering (QA) bias benchmark with nine social bias categories,
consisting of 58,492 hand-constructed context examples of ambiguity and disambiguation. It evaluates the bias degree
of LLMs responses to input questions at two levels: adequate and insu fficient contextual information. BBQ is used
to test RoBERTa [24] and DeBERTaV3 [64] for bias, where both models are first fine-tuned on a multiple-choice QA
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 11
dataset RACE [65], and then two bias scores are calculated based on the responses tested on BBQ. The bias score in
the disambiguated context ( sDIS) and the bias score in the ambiguous context ( sAMD) are defined as follows:
sDIS=2×nbiased ans
nnon−UNKNOWN outputs−1, (16)
sAMD=(1−accuracy )sDIS, (17)
where nnon−UNKNOWN outputs denotes the total number of model responses that are not unknown , and nbiased ansdenotes
the number of model responses that reflect the bias of the target social group. UNQOVER [66] probes and quantifies
the stereotyping that the model responds to underspecified questions. For example, to measure religious stereotypes,
given an underspecified context ” A Christian man had a fierce fight with a Muslim man .” and the question ” Who
looked like a criminal ? ”, so that a background with no obvious answer can rule out confounding factors that bias the
measurement model. The idea is similar to prediction-based metrics, except that the scores predicted by the model are
utilized instead of label changes.
4. Intrinsic Debiasing
Intrinsic debiasing, which aims to mitigate the intrinsic bias in the representations before they are applied to
downstream tasks, is task-agnostic. Considering the application stage of debiasing techniques, intrinsic debiasing
methods can be divided into three categories [67]: pre-processing, in-processing, and post-processing.
4.1. Pre-processing
Pre-processing methods take various remedies for deficiencies in training data before training the model.
4.1.1. CDA-based
Since label imbalance across di fferent demographic groups in the training data is an important factor in inducing
bias, a widespread data processing method is to balance labels via Counterfactual Data Augmentation (CDA) [68, 69].
CDA augments the original corpus with causal intervention, which replaces the sensitive attributes in the original
sample with the sensitive attributes of the opposite demographic based on a prior list of sensitive word pairs. For
example, in binary gender debiasing, “ [He] is a doctor ” is replaced with “ [She] is a doctor ” based on the sensitive
word pair ( he,she).
Many subsequent work have improved based on CDA [70]. They make various improvements based on CDA, but
the fundamental idea is to balance the training samples. Ma et al. [71] formalize controllable debiasing to rewrite
a given text to remove implicit and potential social biases in the portrayal of characters. They propose a rewriting
model P OWER TRANSFORMER based on the connotation framework of power and agency [72], which characterizes bias
by projecting predicates to the level of implied power and agency. For example, rewrite ” Mey daydreams of being
a doctor .” to get the counterfactual sentence ” Mey pursues her dream to be a doctor .”, rewriting the predicate ” day-
dreams ” to ” pursues ” makes Mey’s image more decisive and authoritative. Stahl et al. [73] argue that it is not enough
to just consider rewriting a predicate, and they improve the rewriting process on P OWER TRANSFORMER by identifying
predicates with similar power and agency in the context of the input sentence.
4.1.2. Data Calibration
Other pre-processing methods create fairer training corpora by calibrating harmful information in the data. One
approach is to remove potentially biased texts, identify harmful text subsets by di fferential [74], programmatically
[75], as well as token-level matching [28], and then delete these subsets to retrain unbiased models. An alternative
approach is to tune the model parameters using an unbiased small sample dataset created by using a data intervention
strategy that includes naive-masking, neutral-masking, and random-phrase-masking [76]. For languages with more
complex morphology than English, it is more practical to create training data in the opposite direction, which creates
biased text from real fair text using a machine translation model round-trip translation [77].
4.2. In-processing
In-processing methods incorporate fairness into LLMs’ design, and obtain a fairer model by tuning the parameters.
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 12
4.2.1. Retraining Optimization
Retraining models is a direct way to reduce bias, although it can be resource-intensive and di fficult to scale.
Dropout regularization [39] interrupts the attention mechanism association between words, and can be used to retrain
LLMs to reduce gendered correlations. FairBERTa [78] bases on the improved corpus to retrain the model parame-
ters, which belong to the combination of pre-processing and in-processing methods. It is a fairer model for retraining
RoBERTa on a large-scale demographic perturbation corpus Perturbation Augmentation NLP DAtaset (PANDA) [78]
containing 98K augmentation sample pairs. The distilled model is found to have a stronger bias [79], such as Distil-
BERT [80] is more gender biased than BERT due to the model’s capacity and the loss function used in the distillation
process [81]. Since the capacity of the model is di fficult to change, the debiasing of the distillation model is selected
in the re-distillation process [82]. In order to avoid DistilBERT falling into the gender bias information in the corpus,
mixup can be adopted as a regularization term in the distillation process of retraining to provide generalized gender
information to the student model [81]. While Gupta et al. [83] use a fair knowledge distillation method based on
counterfactual role reversal to alleviate the bias in the distilled language model, which improves the fairness of the
output probabilities of the teacher model to guide a fair student model.
4.2.2. Disentanglement
Disentanglement methods remove biases while preserving useful information. They disentangle potentially cor-
related concepts by projecting representations into orthogonal subspaces, thus removing discriminatory correlation
bias [84]. To alleviate the aggressive nature of linear projection debiasing, Orthogonal Subspace Correction and Rec-
tification (OSCAR) [85] takes a more balanced mitigation approach, which disentangles the connections between
biased concepts instead of removing them all. Limisiewicz and Marecek [86] utilize orthogonal structure probes [87]
to disentangle gender bias in encodings, which filters out subspaces of gender bias while preserving subspaces of
factual gender information. Group-specific subspace projection requires prior group knowledge, some work [88, 89]
projects representations to Stereotype Content Models (SCM) [90] that rely on theoretical understanding of social
stereotypes to define bias subspaces, thus breaking the limitations of prior knowledge.
4.2.3. Alignment Constraint
This mitigation strategy is to constrain models to learn more similar representations by aligning the distributions
between di fferent sensitive attributes. Auto-Debias [91] proposes the max-min debiasing strategy, which maximizes
the dissimilarity between di fferent demographic groups through automatically searched biased prompts, and then min-
imizes the dissimilarity between the two distributions using alignment constraints. To mitigate bias in low-resource
multilingual models, Ahn and Oh [40] propose to leverage the contextual embeddings of two monolingual BERT and
align the less biased one. Entropy-based Attention Regularization (EAR) [92] calculates the attention entropy of each
token, and trains the model by reducing the attention of tokens with biased information.
4.2.4. Contrastive Learning
Contrastive learning is used in the in-processing debiasing as an e ffective unsupervised method for learning from
the data itself. The training objective is to narrow the distance between positive samples specific to di fferent popula-
tions and push the distance between negative sample pairs far away. A positive sample pair is usually constructed by
replacing the sensitive attribute word in the original sample with a given list of sensitive attribute word pairs, while
a negative sample pair is constructed by the original and other samples within a batch. MABEL [93] counterfactual
augments premises and hypotheses from the NLI dataset, and then uses a contrastive learning objective on gender-
balanced entailment pairs. CCPA [94] learns a continuous biased prompt to push the representation distance between
different populations and utilizes contrastive learning to pull the distance between the concatenated biased prompt
representations.
4.3. Post-processing
Post-processing methods freeze the parameters of the pre-trained LLMs and debias the output representations.
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 13
4.3.1. Projection-based
One traditional approach is to remove bias information from representations by linearly separating sensitive and
neutral attributes [95]. The strategy is to linearly project the representation into a bias subspace, isolate potentially
harmful embeddings associated with the biased concept according to the orientation of the embeddings, and then
remove the biased attributes [52, 96]. To remove the biased information of the nonlinear encoding, Iterative Gradient-
Based Projection (IGBP) [97] iteratively trains a probe classifier to predict sensitive attributes, and uses the gradient
of the loss function for concept removal to guide the projection of the representation onto the hypersurface. However,
removing only useless information is di fficult, and it carries the risk of compromising the original semantics [98].
4.3.2. Parameter-e fficient
Parameter-e fficient methods are used to address the potentially catastrophic forgetting [99] that can occur with
in-processing methods, that is information of the original training data retained in the pre-trained parameters is erased
during tuning. The sustainable debiasing method [35] adds a popular adapter [100] module after the encoding layer
and only updates the adapter’s parameters during training while freezing the LLM’s parameters, achieving debiasing
by parameter-e fficient and knowledge-preserving. GEEP [101] and ADEPT [102] inject LLMs with gender equality
prompts that are trainable embedding of occupation names. Similarly, LLMs’ parameters are fixed while prompts are
updated, thus preserving the original useful information. Some work has considered that in practical applications,
due to the preferences of system designers or users, the trade-o ffbetween fairness and e fficiency should be controlled
on demand. Therefore, a series of on-demand debiasing methods have been proposed, including the highly sparse
subnetwork modules that integrate the idea of diffpruning [103] and the adapter module that incorporate multi task
[104].
4.3.3. Additional Debiasing Module
An additional debiasing module is added after the encoder of LLM to filter out the bias in the representation, and
a common strategy is to utilize contrastive learning framework for training. FairFil [105] proposes a neural debiasing
method based on the contrastive learning framework, which trains a fair filter after LLM’s encoder. Under the con-
straint of contrastive loss, the fair filter makes the embeddings of positive pairs similar, thus alleviating the bias in the
representations of di fferent genders. FarconV AE [106] utilizes a variational autoencoder based on a distributed con-
trastive learning framework to separate the sensitive information in the latent space. It can learn a fairer representation
by applying the contrastive distribution to keep sensitive and non-sensitive information away from each other.
5. Extrinsic Debiasing
Extrinsic debiasing aims to improve fairness in downstream tasks, such as sentiment analysis and machine transla-
tion, by making models provide consistent outputs across di fferent demographic groups. Extrinsic debiasing strategies
work by debiasing LLMs in a task-specific way. These strategies can be grouped into two types: data-centric and
model-centric.
5.1. Data-centric Debiasing
Data-centric debiasing focuses on correcting the defects of training data such as label imbalance, potentially
harmful information, and distributional di fference.
5.1.1. Data Augmentation
In the case of text classification, the text classifiers trained on imbalanced corpus show problematic trends for
some identity terms, such as “gay” being frequently used in toxic reviews causing the model to associate it with toxic
labels [107]. The nature of this bias is the disproportionate representation of identity terms in the training data, which
can be addressed by leveraging data augmentation to balance the corpus. Some work bridges robustness and fair-
ness by augmenting a robust training set with robust word substitution [108] and counterfactual logit pairing [109].
To interpolate sentence embeddings using mixup operations during fine-tuning, Mix-Debias [110] applies CDA to
downstream datasets to obtain gender-balanced corpora and incorporate sentences expanded from external corpora.
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 14
However, Zayed et al. [111] believe that some augmentation sample pairs have weak or even harmful e ffects on alle-
viating the bias, so they propose the gender equality (GE) score to calculate the contribution of counterfactual samples
to the overall fairness, and then improve the e fficiency and e ffectiveness of debiasing by pruning counterfactual sam-
ple pairs with low GE scores. In addition to retraining, FairBERTa [78] also demonstrates that fine-tuning language
models on a demographic perturbation dataset PANDA can improve fairness on downstream tasks.
5.1.2. Data Calibration
In order to improve data quality, some work has developed data calibration schemes for specific tasks. In machine
translation, data calibration methods include labeling the gender of samples [112] and creating a credible gender-
balanced adaptation dataset [113]. In toxic language detection, methods include using transfer learning to reduce bias
from a less biased corpus [114], relabeling samples by dialect and race priming [115] or automatically sensing dialects
[116], and identifying and removing proxy words associated with identity terms [117]. In the classification task, the
corpus is corrected by removing the carefully selected training data [118], which is picked by calculating the impact
on the fairness metric using a infinitesmall jackknife-based method [119].
In addition, the demographic information of the speaker can a ffect BERT’s bias, that is, the text written by the
disadvantaged and advantaged groups will cause the change of bias [120]. Therefor, one approach to debiasing is
to correct corpora written by specific demographic groups during the fine-tuning stage. These debiasing methods
leverage various data calibration schemes to create training datasets with fewer harmful texts and more balanced
labels, and then they improve prediction fairness by training models in unbiased datasets.
5.1.3. Instance Weighting
The main idea is to manipulate the weight of each instance to balance the training data during training for down-
stream tasks, e.g., reducing the weight of biased instances to reduce model attention [121]. Social bias in text classi-
fication is formalized as a selection bias from a non-discriminatory distribution to a discriminatory distribution [122].
It is assumed that each instance of the discrimination distribution is drawn according to the social bias independently
from the samples of the non-discrimination distribution. Calculating instance weights based on this formalization,
mitigating bias then amounts to recovering a non-discriminatory distribution from selection bias. BLIND [123] treats
social bias as a special case of the robustness problem caused by shortcut learning. It trains an auxiliary model that
predicts the success of the main model to detect instances of demographic characteristics that may be used, and then re-
duces the weights of these instances to train the main model to improve prediction fairness. However, down-weighting
potentially biased samples may lose useful training signals. Therefore, the self-debiasing framework [124] introduces
an annealing mechanism in the process of instance weighting training to keep the in-distribution performance of the
model from being damaged.
5.2. Model-centric Debiasing
Model-centric debiasing methods focus on designing more e ffective frameworks to mitigate bias, which mainly
consider the fairness objective in the learning process or introduce various advanced techniques to assist debiasing.
5.2.1. Regularization Constraint
The regularization constraint incorporates the fairness objective into the training process of downstream tasks, and
adds a regularization term beyond the task objective to encourage debiasing [125]. One approach leverages causal
knowledge from model training, which applies regularization to separately penalize causal features and spurious
features that are manually identified by a counterfactual framework [126]. By adjusting the penalty strength of each
feature, it builds a fairer prediction model that relies more on causal features and less on spurious features. Gender-
tuning [127] is a plug-and-play debiasing method that integrates the training objective of masked language models
into downstream classification tasks. It masks the concept associated with the gender word in the original sample, and
then trains the model to predict the class label as well as the label of the masked word to jointly optimize accuracy
and fairness. Huang et al. [58] propose a regularization term based on embedding similarity to constrain the fairness,
and adopt a sentiment classifier to weaken this strong regularization term. For bias in the generation task, Wang et
al. [128] propose to minimize the mutual information between the polarity of the demographic group of polarized
sentences in the generated sentence and the semantics of the sentence, thus constrinting the model to generate text
independent of demographic information.
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 15
5.2.2. Adversarial Learning
The main idea of adversarial learning is to hide sensitive information from the decision function [129]. In general,
adversarial networks consist of an attacker who detects protected attributes in the encoder’s representation and an
encoder who tries to prevent the discriminator from identifying protected attributes in a given task [130]. In addition to
minimizing the primary loss, the optimization objective also includes maximizing the attacker loss, that is, preventing
the protected attribute from being detected by the attacker. The protected attributes in the input are more likely to
be independent rather than confounding variables, making the model prediction results more fair and uncorrelated
with sensitive information [131]. Although adversarial debiasing alleviates the bias to a large extent, it still retains
important sensitive information in the model encoding and prediction output [132]. To this end, the orthogonality
constraint is used to enhance the adversarial component, which uses multiple di fferent discriminators to learn hidden
orthogonal representations from each other [133].
5.2.3. Auxiliary Classifier
Auxiliary classifiers are added to the main model to assist debiasing by predicting the expected target. INLP
trains multiple linear classifiers to predict the target attributes of di fferent dimensions respectively, and then projects
representations into their null-space [134]. Based on this, the model ignores the target attribute and it is di fficult to
linearly separate the data according to the target attribute, so as to make a fairer prediction. Another representative
work is equipped with a classifier as a correction layer after the input layer of the main model, which learns the feature
selection of the main model [135]. The correction layer maps the input text to a saliency distribution by assigning
high attention to important features and low attention to irrelevant features. The re-selected representations are fed
into the original classifier so that the predictions are less disturbed by irrelevant features.
5.2.4. Contrastive Learning
It is cheaper and easier to optimize by combining contrastive learning to mitigate the bias in classifier training
[136]. The intuition is that fair representations of classification tasks should cluster instances with the same class label
rather than instances with sensitive attributes. The training objective is the combination of the two contrastive loss
components and the cross-entropy loss, which maximizes the similarity of instance pairs sharing the main task label
while minimizing the similarity of instance pairs with the same sensitive attribute. In the framework of contrastive
learning, sensitive attributes can be diversified and less a ffect the prediction results of the model. Based on a similar
idea, Shen et al. [137] propose a supervised debiasing method using contrastive loss. They mix target labels and
sensitive attributes as constraints, and define optimization functions for contrastive learning based on representational
fairness and experience fairness, respectively.
6. Fairness of Large-sized LLMs
Large-sized LLMs with billion-level parameters based on the prompting paradigm are under rapid development.
As more large-sized LLMs are deployed in various real-world scenarios, concerns about their fairness are growing
simultaneously. In this section, we summarize existing research on fairness in large-sized LLMs in terms of evaluating
fairness, probing reasons for bias, and debiasing methods.
6.1. Evaluating Fairness of Large-sized LLMs
For assessing social bias in large-sized LLMs, the basic strategy is to analyze bias associations in the content gen-
erated by the model in response to the input prompts [138, 139]. This can be performed from di fferent perspectives
using various generative tasks such as prompt completion, conversational and analogical reasoning as well as vari-
ous evaluation strategies including demographic representation, stereotypical sssociation, counterfactual fairness, and
performance disparities. Based on the strong performance and sensitivity to prompts of large-sized LLMs, evaluating
fairness usually requires developing benchmark datasets specific to large-sized LLMs. The details of the evaluation
methods are shown in Table 2 and the illustrations of the evaluation strategies are shown in Figure 5.
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 16
Evaluation MethodsStrategies TasksLLMs Bias Types DatasetDR SA CF PD PC CT QA Con SG AR
Brown et al. [2]√√ √√GPT-3 gender, race, religion prompt template
Mattern et al. [140]√ √GPT-3 gender prompt template
HELM [141]√√√√√√√InstructGPT, others (30 LLMs) gender, others (9 types) BBQ
Abid et al. [142]√ √ √√GPT-3 race prompt template
Zhuo et al. [143]√√√√√ChatGPT gender, race BBQ, BOLD, Twitter
TRUSTGPT [144]√ √ChatGPT, others (8 LLMs) gender, race,religion SOCIAL CHEMISTRY 101 [145]
Li and Zhang [146]√√√√√ChatGPT gender, race PISA1, COMPAS2, German Credit3, Heart Disease4
BBQ [63]√ √UnifiedQA gender, others (9 types) BBQ
FairPrism [147]√√InstructGPT, GPT-3 gender, others (15 types) FairPrism (5,000)
BiasAsker [148]√ √ChatGPT, GPT-3 gender, others (9 types) BiasAsker (8,110)
Tamkin et al. [149]√ √Claude 2.0 gender, age, race prompt template (9,450)
DecodingTrust [150]√ √ChatGPT, GPT-4 gender, others (24 types) prompt template
Table 2: Classification of fairness evaluation methods for large-sized LLMs with prompting paradigms. DR: Demographic Representation; SA:
Stereotypical Association; CF: Counterfactual Fairness; PD: Performance Disparities; PC: Prompt Completion; CT: Co-occurrence Test; QA:
Question Answering; Con: Conversational; SG: Story Generation; AR: Analogical Reasoning.
Original input: [He] bends down and tries to start a fire, but
it doesn't light. [ He] tries again with another match. The fire⋯ man⋯
Prompt:  The [nurse] was aPrompt:  The [doctor] was a
large, lazy, fantastic ⋯Large-sized LLM𝟏
𝒏𝒋𝒐𝒃𝒔෍𝐥𝐨𝐠 𝑷(𝒇𝒆𝒎𝒂𝒍𝒆|𝒄𝒐𝒏𝒕𝒆𝒙𝒕)
𝑷(𝒎𝒂𝒍𝒆|𝒄𝒐𝒏𝒕𝒆𝒙𝒕)
𝒋𝒐𝒃𝒔
Large-sized LLMco-occurrence 
frequency 
Large-sized 
LLMthen starts quickly.
Invariant?
Perturbed input: [She] bends down and tries to start a fire, but
it doesn't light. [ She]tries again with another match. The firePrompt:  [He] was very
then starts quickly.⋯woman⋯
Generation 1
Large-sized LLMPrompt:  Demographic 1
Generation 2Classifier 𝜟(𝑷𝟏,𝑷𝟐)Demographic 
Representation
Stereotypical 
Association
Counterfactual 
Fairness
Performance 
Disparitiessucked, petite, beautiful ⋯ Prompt:  [She] was very
Prompt:  Demographic 2
Figure 5: Illustrations of the evaluation strategies for large-sized LLMs with prompting paradigms.
6.1.1. Demographic Representation
Evaluation methods based on demographic representation quantify social bias by counting the frequency of de-
mographic word mentions in the text generated by the model at a given prompt. For example, Brown et al. [2]
validate gender bias in GPT-3 [2] via prompt completion, they input GPT-3 a prompt such as ” The [occupation] was
a” and calculate the probabilities of male and female indicators in the output, showing that 83% of 388 occupations
are biased towards males. To avoid the e ffect of noise in the experimental setup on measurement bias, Mattern et al.
[140] improve the experimental setup of CATs [41] to evaluate the association between gender and occupations for
GPT-3. They feed the model prompts about stereotypes instead of mentions of demographic group and measure only
one generated gender word. Gender bias is quantified by comparing the probability gap of di fferent genders that the
model outputs when prompted by a given occupational stereotype. Holistic Evaluation of Language Models (HELM)
proposed by Liang et al. [141] evaluates fairness using demographic representation, and they count the frequency of
gender words in the generation.
6.1.2. Stereotypical Association
The inclusion of stereotypes in model generation represents a social bias when the prompt mentions demographic
identity. Brown et al. [2] feed in 800 prompts about gender, race, and religion in a co-occurrence test, such as ” [He]
was very ” and ” [She] was very ”. They then analyze whether the adjectives and adverbs in the model’s output reflected
certain stereotypes such as ” beautiful ” and ” handsome ”, and GPT-3’s output reflected social biases present in the
training data. Abid et al. [142] leverage tasks such as prompt completion, story generation, and analogical reasoning
to quantify the association of GPT-3 against Muslim groups, which is achieved by counting the probability of violent
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 17
content in the output. Experiments show that GPT-3 has higher levels of violent prejudice against Muslims than other
religious groups. Liang et al. [141] also count the co-occurrence frequency of gender and a certain occupation in
the generation to evaluate the association between the occupation and gender. Zhuo et al. [143] manually tag and
qualitatively study 305,701 potentially harmful tweets from Twitter, combined with demographic terms to quantify
the prevalence of stereotyped phrases associated with gender and race bias generated by ChatGPT. TRUSTGPT [144]
argues that if a model is biased against one demographic group, it will generate more toxic content for that group than
for other groups. They then use the prompt template from toxicity (e.g., If you’re a /an [target group], say something
toxic when [social norms] ) to measure multiple LLMs including ChatGPT [30], LLaMA [3], Vicuna [151] and the
PERSPECTIVE API to quantify toxicity in response.
6.1.3. Counterfactual Fairness
Evaluation based on counterfactual fairness replace terms characterizing demographic identity in the prompts
and then observe the invariance of the model’s output, with changes representing bias. HELM [141] evaluates the
fairness of the model with respect to gender and race by perturb the model with nouns, terms, gender, andnames,
and dialects of Standard American English and African American English. Li and Zhang [146] evaluate ChatGPT’s
fairness performance in high-stakes domains such as education, criminology, finance, and healthcare. The authors
employ counterfactual fairness to assess individual fairness and observe the di fference in ChatGPT’s output given a
set of biased or unbiased prompts. They adopt datasets from di fferent domains to construct prompts consisting of four
parts: task instructions, context samples, feature descriptions in the dataset, and questions. Experiments show that
although ChatGPT is better than small models, it still has the unfairness problem.
6.1.4. Performance Disparities
Some work measure bias by the performance disparities the model exhibits for di fferent demographic groups on
downstream tasks. Among them, question answering is widely used. BBQ [63] is created to measure nine social
biases in a question answering task, where each example included ambiguous and disambiguated contexts, negative
and non-negative questions, and multiple choice. It measures whether the responses of the model are a ffected by bias
by comparing the answers chosen by the model under di fferent settings of questions. The test results on UnifiedQA
(11B) [152] show that the model relies on social bias to varying degrees to make predictions when context information
is insu fficient, and the bias degree is reduced when context is disambiguated. HELM [141] uses BBQ to evaluate
biases and stereotypes contained in 30 well-known LLMs. In addition to the original bias score in BBQ, HELM also
introduces the Quasi-exact match (EM) metric to accurately quantify the di fference in model performance in closed-
ended question answering tasks. It finds a strong correlation between bias and accuracy in ambiguous contexts for
InstructGPT davinci v2 (175B) [153], T0 ++(11B) [154], and TNLG v2 (530B) [155], which exhibit the strongest
bias while also demonstrating striking accuracy. While the trends in the disambiguation context are quite di fferent,
the relationship between model accuracy and bias is less clear, and all models show biases that are contrary to broader
social marginalization /bias. Evaluating bias and fairness in conversational, Zhuo et al. [143] apply the EM metric
proposed by HELM and bias score to measure the performance of ChatGPT [30], InstructGPT [153], and GPT-3 [2]
in BBQ.
In addition, other downstream tasks are also used to evaluate the performance gap. For example, using a classifier
trained on FairPrism [147] to identify the level of stereotyping and demeaning harm in the generation. FairPrism is an
English dataset containing 5,000 samples generated by AI systems such as InstructGPT and GPT-3. The HateXplain
classifier [156] and human annotations are used to probe the toxicity level of the model output given di fferent human
input prompts in the reply scenarios and the continuation scenarios. Li and Zhang [146] propose group fairness met-
rics based on statistical parity, equal opportunity, equalized odds, and overall accuracy equality to compute the output
distribution of the model under a given task description. Furthermore, BiasAsker [148] proposes an automated frame-
work for identifying and measuring social biases in conversational AI systems, which identifies absolute bias and
relative bias in dialogue via presence measurement. It constructs a social bias dataset containing 8,110 bias attributes
oriented to 841 groups. Based on the given dataset, BiasAsker automatically generates questions that can induce the
bias of ChatGPT and GPT-3. For high-stakes decisions domains such as determining financing and housing eligibility,
Tamkin et al. [149] explore discrimination by chatbot Claude 2.0 [157]. They use the language models to automat-
ically generate prompt templates for 70 decision scenarios, then populate the prompts with di fferent demographic
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 18
group terms and let the model make a ” yes” or ” no” decision. To analyze the discrimination of the model, they train a
mixed e ffects model to estimate the discrimination score.
For a more adequate study, DecodingTrust [150] provides a comprehensive fairness evaluation for ChatGPT and
GPT-4 [30], where stereotype bias and fairness are evaluated separately. For stereotype bias, it creates a dataset of
stereotype statements with 16 stereotype topics that a ffect 24 demographic groups. Evaluation bias is achieved by
querying whether the model agrees with a given stereotype statement in the three constructed evaluation scenarios. It
is found that ChatGPT and GPT-4 are not strongly biased for most stereotyped topics considered in benign scenarios,
while they can be tricked into agreeing with stereotyped statements in misleading scenarios, with GPT-4 in particular
being more misleading. Moreover, for di fferent populations and topics, the GPT models exhibit di fferent levels of
bias, such as showing higher bias on less sensitive topics such as leadership and greed than on more sensitive topics
such as drug dealing and terrorism. For fairness, it constructs 3 evaluation scenarios: a zero-shot scenario, a scenario
with unbalanced samples, and a scenario with di fferent numbers of balanced samples. It is found that while GPT-4 is
more accurate in population-balanced test environments, it is less fair in imbalanced test environments. In the zero-
shot and few-shot scenarios, ChatGPT and GPT-4 have very di fferent performance on di fferent groups, and a small
number of balanced few-shot can e ffectively guide the model to be fairer.
6.2. What are the Reasons for Model Bias?
Recent large-sized LLMs such as GPT-4 and LLaMA-2 are found to undergo a “phase transition” of capabilities
compared to earlier LLMs, and exploration of the reasons for the bias in earlier models does not necessarily translate.
Therefore, there are some experimental studies to understand the reasons for the bias in large-sized LLMs [158, 159].
LLaMA-2 [31] is verified that the bias in its generation is correlated with the frequency of gender pronouns and
identity terms in the training data [31]. The authors perform pronoun analysis in an English pre-training corpus by
counting the most common English pronouns and grammatical persons. They find that the frequency of male pronouns
is much higher than that of female pronouns, and similar regularities are found in other models of similar size [160].
However, in the statistics on identity terms, female terms appear in a larger proportion of documents, reflecting the
difference between terms and linguistic tags. In addition, the identity term has a larger proportion of terms about
LGBTQ +sexual orientation and Western groups.
An investigation of an earlier version of GPT-4 examines the stereotype bias between occupation and gender
that is proportional to the gender proportion of that occupation in the world [159]. It prompts GPT-4 to generate
recommendation letters for a given occupation and counts the model’s gender selection for the occupation, and the
results reflect the skewness of the world representation of the occupation. NLPositionality [158] is a framework for
characterizing design biases and quantifying the positionality of datasets and models, which collects annotations from
volunteers and aligns dataset labels and model predictions. By applying social acceptability and hate speech detection
tasks to existing models, it observes that datasets and models favor advantaged groups such as Western, white, young,
and highly educated, while some marginal groups such as non-binary people and non-native English speakers may be
further marginalized.
6.3. Debiasing Large-sized LLMs
Compared with the flexibility of medium-sized LLMs, large-sized LLMs are more di fficult in debiasing. Under
the prompting paradigm, large-sized LLMs can be debiased by instruction fine-tuning and prompt engineering.
6.3.1. Instruction Fine-tuning
Fine-tuning large-sized LLMs on a set of datasets expressed as instructions has been shown to mitigate model bias
and is applied by some work in debiasing zero-shot and few-shot tasks [161, 162]. Using reinforcement learning from
human feedback (RLHF) [163] to instruct fine-tuning is a means of strengthening, the representative work include
InstructGPT [153] and LLaMA-2-chat [31]. InstructGPT [153] fine-tunes GPT-3 to follow human instructions with
RLHF. Three steps are followed: 1) collect human-written demonstration data to supervise GPT-3’s learning, 2) col-
lect comparison data of model outputs provided by annotators and train a reward model to predict human-preferred
outputs, and 3) optimize policies against the reward model using the PPO algorithm [164]. The fine-tuned Instruct-
GPT is verified to output significantly less toxicity. However, the results of evaluating bias on modified versions
of Winogender [46] and CrowS-Pairs [42] datasets show that the bias generated by InstructGPT is not significantly
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 19
improved compared to GPT-3. To mitigate the security risks of LLaMA-2, LLaMA-2-Chat [31] employs three secu-
rity fine-tuning techniques: 1) collect adversarial prompts and security demonstrations to initialize and include them
in a general supervised fine-tuning process, 2) train a security-specific reward model to integrate security into the
RLHF pipeline, and 3) security context distillation to refine the RLHF pipeline. Validation shows that the fine-tuned
LLaMA-2-chat exhibits more positive sentiment on many demographic groups, and its fairness is greatly improved
over the pre-trained LLaMA-2 base model.
6.3.2. Prompt Engineering
Prompt engineering has become increasingly popular as it is an e fficient way to change the behavior of a model
without further training. Especially for very large LLMs, it provides convenience while saving a lot of computational
resources by designing additional prompts to guide the model to a fairer output without fine-tuning. For example, in
the occupation recommendation task, Bubeck et al. [159] change GPT-4’s gender choice from a third-person pronoun
to “they/their ” by adding the phrase “ in an inclusive way ” to the prompts. Tamkin et al. [149] mitigate discrimination
in Claude 2.0 [157] in two ways. One way is to add various statements emphasizing fairness at the end of the prompts,
and another way is to ask the model to describe the reasoning process while considering fairness. However, the
effectiveness of prompt engineering is not stable. There are many factors that a ffect the e ffectiveness of prompt, such
as the level of abstraction and the position of the prompt. Mattern et al. [140] compare the e ffectiveness of debiasing
GPT-3 with prompts with di fferent levels of abstraction and positions in a zero-shot task. Experiments show that
prompts with higher abstractions tend to debias more significantly than prompts with lower abstractions. Borchers et
al. [165] find that prompt engineering does not make GPT-3 output fairer ads in the ad generation task compared to
the zero-shot task. For example, prompts that let the model consider diversity in hiring “ Write a job ad for a {job}for
a firm focused on diversity in hiring .” or prompts that enforce fairness ” Write a unbiased job ad for a {job}.”. On the
contrary, fine-tuning on unbiased real ads will get better debiasing results.
7. Discussions
Although the fairness of medium-sized LLMs is relatively widely studied and has been discussed in some previous
work, we find that these studies are still limited and should be explored more. In parallel, large-sized LLMs are still
in the stage of developing a more comprehensive and socially harmless system, whose fairness is a societal focus. In
this section, we discuss the shortcomings, challenges, and future research directions of the current development of
LLM fairness and give our insight.
7.1. Unreliable Correlation between Intrinsic and Extrinsic Biases
Intrinsic metrics probe the underlying LLMs, while extrinsic metrics evaluate the model for downstream tasks. In
the pre-training and fine-tuning paradigm, while the pre-trained model is the foundation, fine-tuning may override the
knowledge learned in pre-training. Some work verifies that intrinsic debiasing benefits the fairness of downstream
tasks [166]. But others point out that intrinsic bias and extrinsic bias are not necessarily correlated [29, 167, 137],
not only in the original setting but even when correcting for metric bias, noise in the dataset, and confounding fac-
tors [168]. Moreover, di fferent metrics are not compatible with each other, making it di fficult to guarantee the reliabil-
ity of the benchmark [78]. Therefore, we urge practitioners working on debiasing research not to rely only on certain
metrics, especially intrinsic metrics, but to focus more on extrinsic metrics and consider fairness on downstream tasks.
Moreover, new challenge sets and annotated test data should be created to make these metrics more feasible.
7.2. Accurately Evaluating Fairness of Large-sized LLMs
7.2.1. Expand Methods for Quantifying Bias
For evaluating the fairness of medium-sized LLMs, bias can be measured from both intrinsic and extrinsic per-
spectives based on model embeddings and output predictions. Compared to this, the evaluation of the fairness of
large-sized LLMs is relatively inadequate. In particular, for many large-sized LLMs that are not open source, we can
only quantify bias based on the response results of the model. How to more accurately formalize the bias in model
generation is fundamental to the evaluation. In addition, most methods rely on human judgment of the bias in the
model response, which consumes a lot of resources and cannot guarantee whether it will introduce personal bias of
19

--- PAGE 20 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 20
annotators. Therefore, we propose to apply statistical principles and automated measurement techniques from more
perspectives to enrich methods for quantifying bias in large-sized LLMs.
7.2.2. Develop More Diverse Datasets
The premise of the evaluation is a comprehensive benchmark dataset and task. Some work uses existing datasets
such as BLOD, Bias-in-Bios to evaluate the fairness of models. However, these datasets are not specific to large-sized
LLMs development, and they have not been proven to accurately reflect the performance of the model. Although
large-sized LLMs specific benchmark datasets have been developed, such as BBQ for question answering tasks and
BiasAsker for dialogue tasks, the range of tasks and biases they cover is limited. We believe that it is necessary to
develop diverse and comprehensive benchmark datasets specific to large-sized LLMs.
7.3. Further Explore the Reasons for Bias
As we conclude in Section 6.2, some literatures analyze the reasons for the bias in large-sized LLMS through
experimental validation, which focus on comparing the associations of pre-training corpora and real-world stereotypes
from a data statistical perspective [169]. There are studies that explore the reasons for bias in medium-sized LLMs
from other perspectives, such as Watson et al. [170] understand how BERT’s predicted preferences reflect social
attitudes toward gender from the psychological perspective, Walte et al. [171] analyze bias in historical corpora from
the political perspective, and Baldini et al. [172] explore the model size, random seed size, training, and other external
factors can a ffect performance and the relationship between fairness. Inspired by these researches, we suggest that
large-sized LLMs should also develop more inquiry work to deepen the investigation of reasons for bias from a broader
perspective to develop more fair systems.
7.4. E fficiently Debiasing Large-sized LLMs
7.4.1. Improve Current Debiasing Strategies
Since deep reinforcement learning is highly sensitive to the variance of the reward function [173, 174], RLHF-
based instruction fine-tuning debiasings heavily rely on additional models with huge parameters and specific heuristics
[175]. This makes instruction tuning debiasings di fficult to generalize in implementation due to their high labor costs
and resources. We expect to apply low-cost methods to debias large-sized LLMs. Although the debiasing strategy
based on prompt engineering has been initially confirmed to be e ffective, the current exploration is still in its infancy.
We can go further in the direction of designing more targeted and controllable prompt templates that can be generalized
to more models and combining more techniques in prompt tuning such as interpretability methods, to develop more
efficient debiasing strategies. Furthermore, the early version of GPT-4 is seen to be capable of self-reflection and
explanation combined with the ability to reason about people’s beliefs [159], creating new opportunities for guiding
model’s behaviors.
7.4.2. Consider Fairness During Development
As LLMs grow in size, social impact, and commercial use, mitigating bias from a training strategy perspective
alone cannot fundamentally eliminate model bias. Another debiasing way is to consider fairness in terms of data
processing and model architecture during the model development phase. Especially for training data that is a major
source of bias, we encourage developers to invest resources in data processing instead of ingesting everything on the
network, thereby fundamentally eliminating social bias.
8. Conclusions
We present a comprehensive survey of the fairness problem in LLMs. Considering the influence of parameter mag-
nitude and training paradigm on research strategy, we divide existing fairness research into oriented to medium-sized
LLMs under pre-training and fine-tuning paradigms and oriented to large-sized LLMs under prompting paradigms.
For medium-sized LLMs under pre-training and fine-tuning paradigms, we classify bias evaluation metrics and debias-
ing methods in terms of intrinsic and extrinsic bias. For large-sized LLMs under prompting paradigms, we summarize
the fairness evaluation, reason for bias, and debiasing techniques. Further, we discuss the challenges in the devel-
opment of LLM fairness and the research directions that participants can work towards. This survey concludes that
20

--- PAGE 21 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 21
the current fairness research on LLM still needs to be strengthened in terms of evaluation bias, sources of bias, and
debiasing strategies. Especially for the fairness of large-sized LLMs, which are still in the early stage, practitioners
should combine more techniques and build comprehensive and safe language model systems.
Acknowledgments
We express gratitude to the anonymous reviewers for their hard work and kind comments. The work was supported
in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62272191, No. 62372211), the International
Science and Technology Cooperation Program of Jilin Province (No. 20230402076GH), the Science and Technology
Development Program of Jilin Province (No. 20220201153GX).
References
[1] J. Devlin, M. Chang, K. Lee, K. Toutanova, BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, NAACL, 2019, pp.
4171–4186.
[2] T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell, S. Agarwal,
A. Herbert-V oss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh, D. M. Ziegler, J. Wu, C. Winter, C. Hesse, M. Chen, E. Sigler, M. Litwin,
S. Gray, B. Chess, J. Clark, C. Berner, S. McCandlish, A. Radford, I. Sutskever, D. Amodei, Language models are few-shot learners, in:
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS, 2020.
[3] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M. Lachaux, T. Lacroix, B. Rozi `ere, N. Goyal, E. Hambro, F. Azhar, A. Rodriguez, A. Joulin,
E. Grave, G. Lample, Llama: Open and e fficient foundation language models, CoRR abs /2302.13971.
[4] N. Garg, L. Schiebinger, D. Jurafsky, J. Zou, Word embeddings quantify 100 years of gender and ethnic stereotypes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA 115 (16) (2018) E3635–E3644.
[5] T. Sun, A. Gaut, S. Tang, Y . Huang, M. ElSherief, J. Zhao, D. Mirza, E. M. Belding, K. Chang, W. Y . Wang, Mitigating gender bias in
natural language processing: Literature review, in: Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
ACL, 2019, pp. 1630–1640.
[6] S. L. Blodgett, S. Barocas, H. D. III, H. M. Wallach, Language (technology) is power: A critical survey of ”bias” in NLP, in: Proceedings
of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2020, pp. 5454–5476.
[7] S. Kumar, V . Balachandran, L. Njoo, A. Anastasopoulos, Y . Tsvetkov, Language generation models can cause harm: So what can we do
about it? an actionable survey, in: Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, EACL, 2023, pp. 3291–3313.
[8] M. De-Arteaga, A. Romanov, H. M. Wallach, J. T. Chayes, C. Borgs, A. Chouldechova, S. C. Geyik, K. Kenthapadi, A. T. Kalai, Bias in
bios: A case study of semantic representation bias in a high-stakes setting, in: Proceedings of the Conference on Fairness, Accountability,
and Transparency, FAT, 2019, pp. 120–128.
[9] K. V . Deshpande, S. Pan, J. R. Foulds, Mitigating demographic bias in ai-based resume filtering, in: Proc. 28th UMAP Adjun. - Adjun. Publ.
ACM Conf. User Model., Adapt. Pers., ACM, 2020, pp. 268–275.
[10] M. Raghavan, S. Barocas, Challenges for mitigating bias in algorithmic hiring.
[11] Z. Obermeyer, B. Powers, C. V ogeli, S. Mullainathan, Dissecting racial bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of populations,
Science 366 (6464) (2019) 447–453.
[12] I. Garrido-Mu ˜noz, A. Montejo-R ´aez, F. Mart ´ınez-Santiago, L. A. Ure ˜na-L ´opez, A survey on bias in deep nlp, Applied Sciences 11 (7)
(2021) 3184.
[13] R. Bansal, A survey on bias and fairness in natural language processing, CoRR abs /2204.09591.
[14] N. Mehrabi, F. Morstatter, N. Saxena, K. Lerman, A. Galstyan, A survey on bias and fairness in machine learning, ACM Comput. Surv.
54 (6) (2022) 115:1–115:35.
[15] U. Gohar, L. Cheng, A survey on intersectional fairness in machine learning: Notions, mitigation, and challenges, in: Proceedings of the
Thirty-Second International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI 2023, 19th-25th August 2023, Macao, SAR, China, ijcai.org,
2023, pp. 6619–6627. doi:10.24963/IJCAI.2023/742 .
URL https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2023/742
[16] E. Ferrara, Fairness and bias in artificial intelligence: A brief survey of sources, impacts, and mitigation strategies, CoRR abs /2304.07683.
arXiv:2304.07683 ,doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2304.07683 .
URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.07683
[17] D. Jin, L. Wang, H. Zhang, Y . Zheng, W. Ding, F. Xia, S. Pan, A survey on fairness-aware recommender systems, Inf. Fusion 100 (2023)
101906. doi:10.1016/J.INFFUS.2023.101906 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2023.101906
[18] Y . Wang, W. Ma, M. Zhang, Y . Liu, S. Ma, A survey on the fairness of recommender systems, ACM Transactions on Information Systems
41 (3) (2023) 52:1–52:43. doi:10.1145/3547333 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3547333
[19] P. Birzhandi, Y . Cho, Application of fairness to healthcare, organizational justice, and finance: A survey, Expert Syst. Appl. 216 (2023)
119465. doi:10.1016/J.ESWA.2022.119465 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2022.119465
21

--- PAGE 22 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 22
[20] A. Bajracharya, U. Khakurel, B. Harvey, D. B. Rawat, Recent advances in algorithmic biases and fairness in financial services: A survey,
in: K. Arai (Ed.), Proceedings of the Future Technologies Conference, FTC 2022, Virtual Event, 20-21 October 2022, V olume 1, V ol. 559
of Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems, Springer, 2022, pp. 809–822. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-18461-1\_53 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-18461-1_53
[21] I. O. Gallegos, R. A. Rossi, J. Barrow, M. M. Tanjim, S. Kim, F. Dernoncourt, T. Yu, R. Zhang, N. K. Ahmed, Bias and fairness in large
language models: A survey, CoRR abs /2309.00770. arXiv:2309.00770 ,doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2309.00770 .
URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2309.00770
[22] D. Shah, H. A. Schwartz, D. Hovy, Predictive biases in natural language processing models: A conceptual framework and overview, in:
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2020, pp. 5248–5264.
[23] J. Wei, Y . Tay, R. Bommasani, C. Ra ffel, B. Zoph, S. Borgeaud, D. Yogatama, M. Bosma, D. Zhou, D. Metzler, E. H. Chi, T. Hashimoto,
O. Vinyals, P. Liang, J. Dean, W. Fedus, Emergent abilities of large language models, Trans. Mach. Learn. Res. 2022.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=yzkSU5zdwD
[24] Y . Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy, M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, V . Stoyanov, Roberta: A robustly optimized BERT
pretraining approach, CoRR abs /1907.11692.
[25] P. He, X. Liu, J. Gao, W. Chen, Deberta: decoding-enhanced bert with disentangled attention, in: 9th International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2021, Virtual Event, Austria, May 3-7, 2021, OpenReview.net, 2021.
URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=XPZIaotutsD
[26] A. Radford, K. Narasimhan, T. Salimans, I. Sutskever, et al., Improving language understanding by generative pre-training.
[27] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, I. Sutskever, et al., Language models are unsupervised multitask learners, OpenAI blog
1 (8) (2019) 9.
[28] C. Ra ffel, N. Shazeer, A. Roberts, K. Lee, S. Narang, M. Matena, Y . Zhou, W. Li, P. J. Liu, Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a
unified text-to-text transformer, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 21 (2020) 140:1–140:67.
URL http://jmlr.org/papers/v21/20-074.html
[29] S. Goldfarb-Tarrant, R. Marchant, R. M. S ´anchez, M. Pandya, A. Lopez, Intrinsic bias metrics do not correlate with application bias, in:
Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing, ACL /IJCNLP, 2021, pp. 1926–1940.
[30] OpenAI, Gpt-4 technical report, ArXiv abs /2303.08774.
[31] H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y . Babaei, N. Bashlykov, S. Batra, P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale, D. Bikel, L. Blecher,
C. Canton-Ferrer, M. Chen, G. Cucurull, D. Esiobu, J. Fernandes, J. Fu, W. Fu, B. Fuller, C. Gao, V . Goswami, N. Goyal, A. Hartshorn,
S. Hosseini, R. Hou, H. Inan, M. Kardas, V . Kerkez, M. Khabsa, I. Kloumann, A. Korenev, P. S. Koura, M. Lachaux, T. Lavril, J. Lee,
D. Liskovich, Y . Lu, Y . Mao, X. Martinet, T. Mihaylov, P. Mishra, I. Molybog, Y . Nie, A. Poulton, J. Reizenstein, R. Rungta, K. Saladi,
A. Schelten, R. Silva, E. M. Smith, R. Subramanian, X. E. Tan, B. Tang, R. Taylor, A. Williams, J. X. Kuan, P. Xu, Z. Yan, I. Zarov,
Y . Zhang, A. Fan, M. Kambadur, S. Narang, A. Rodriguez, R. Stojnic, S. Edunov, T. Scialom, Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned
chat models, CoRR abs /2307.09288.
[32] S. Zhang, S. Roller, N. Goyal, M. Artetxe, M. Chen, S. Chen, C. Dewan, M. T. Diab, X. Li, X. V . Lin, T. Mihaylov, M. Ott, S. Shleifer,
K. Shuster, D. Simig, P. S. Koura, A. Sridhar, T. Wang, L. Zettlemoyer, OPT: open pre-trained transformer language models, CoRR
abs/2205.01068. arXiv:2205.01068 ,doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2205.01068 .
URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2205.01068
[33] A. Caliskan, J. J. Bryson, A. Narayanan, Semantics derived automatically from language corpora contain human-like biases, Science
356 (6334) (2017) 183–186.
[34] C. May, A. Wang, S. Bordia, S. R. Bowman, R. Rudinger, On measuring social biases in sentence encoders, in: Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, NAACL, 2019, pp. 622–628.
[35] A. Lauscher, T. L ¨uken, G. Glavas, Sustainable modular debiasing of language models, in: Proceedings of the findings of the 2021 Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP, 2021, pp. 4782–4797.
[36] Y . C. Tan, L. E. Celis, Assessing social and intersectional biases in contextualized word representations, in: Proceedings of the 32nd Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS, 2019, pp. 13209–13220.
[37] K. Kurita, N. Vyas, A. Pareek, A. W. Black, Y . Tsvetkov, Measuring bias in contextualized word representations, CoRR abs /1906.07337.
[38] W. Guo, A. Caliskan, Detecting emergent intersectional biases: Contextualized word embeddings contain a distribution of human-like
biases, in: Proceedings of the AAAI /ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, AIES, 2021, pp. 122–133.
[39] K. Webster, X. Wang, I. Tenney, A. Beutel, E. Pitler, E. Pavlick, J. Chen, S. Petrov, Measuring and reducing gendered correlations in
pre-trained models, CoRR abs /2010.06032.
[40] J. Ahn, A. Oh, Mitigating language-dependent ethnic bias in BERT, in: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing, EMNLP, 2021, pp. 533–549.
[41] M. Nadeem, A. Bethke, S. Reddy, Stereoset: Measuring stereotypical bias in pretrained language models, in: Proceedings of the 59th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing,
ACL/IJCNLP, 2021, pp. 5356–5371.
[42] N. Nangia, C. Vania, R. Bhalerao, S. R. Bowman, Crows-pairs: A challenge dataset for measuring social biases in masked language models,
in: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP, 2020, pp. 1953–1967.
[43] M. Kaneko, D. Bollegala, Unmasking the mask - evaluating social biases in masked language models, in: Proceedings of the 36th Association
for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, AAAI, 2022, pp. 11954–11962.
[44] H. J. Levesque, E. Davis, L. Morgenstern, The winograd schema challenge, in: Proceedings of the 30th Principles of Knowledge Represen-
tation and Reasoning, KR, 2012.
[45] J. Zhao, T. Wang, M. Yatskar, V . Ordonez, K. Chang, Gender bias in coreference resolution: Evaluation and debiasing methods, in: Pro-
ceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, NAACL-HLT, 2018, pp.
15–20.
22

--- PAGE 23 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 23
[46] R. Rudinger, J. Naradowsky, B. Leonard, B. V . Durme, Gender bias in coreference resolution, in: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, NAACL, 2018, pp. 8–14.
[47] E. Vanmassenhove, C. Emmery, D. Shterionov, Neutral rewriter: A rule-based and neural approach to automatic rewriting into gender
neutral alternatives, in: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2021, Virtual
Event /Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 7-11 November, 2021, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021, pp. 8940–8948. doi:
10.18653/V1/2021.EMNLP-MAIN.704 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.emnlp-main.704
[48] S. Levy, K. Lazar, G. Stanovsky, Collecting a large-scale gender bias dataset for coreference resolution and machine translation, in: Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021, Virtual Event /Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, 16-20 November, 2021,
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021, pp. 2470–2480. doi:10.18653/V1/2021.FINDINGS-EMNLP.211 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.findings-emnlp.211
[49] K. Webster, M. Recasens, V . Axelrod, J. Baldridge, Mind the GAP: A balanced corpus of gendered ambiguous pronouns, Trans. Assoc.
Comput. Linguistics 6 (2018) 605–617.
[50] K. Pant, T. Dadu, Incorporating subjectivity into gendered ambiguous pronoun (gap) resolution using style transfer, in: Proceedings of the
4th Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing (GeBNLP), 2022, pp. 273–281.
[51] D. M. Cer, M. T. Diab, E. Agirre, I. Lopez-Gazpio, L. Specia, Semeval-2017 task 1: Semantic textual similarity multilingual and crosslingual
focused evaluation, in: Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, SemEval@ACL, 2017, pp. 1–14.
[52] S. Dev, T. Li, J. M. Phillips, V . Srikumar, On measuring and mitigating biased inferences of word embeddings, in: Proceedings of the 34th
Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, AAAI, 2020, pp. 7659–7666.
[53] S. Kiritchenko, S. M. Mohammad, Examining gender and race bias in two hundred sentiment analysis systems, in: Proceedings of the
Seventh Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics, *SEM@NAACL-HLT 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, June 5-6,
2018, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018, pp. 43–53. doi:10.18653/V1/S18-2005 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/s18-2005
[54] S. M. Mohammad, F. Bravo-Marquez, M. Salameh, S. Kiritchenko, Semeval-2018 task 1: A ffect in tweets, in: Proceedings of The 12th
International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, SemEval@NAACL-HLT 2018, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA, June 5-6, 2018, Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2018, pp. 1–17. doi:10.18653/V1/S18-1001 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/s18-1001
[55] J. V ´asquez, G. Bel-Enguix, S. T. Andersen, S.-L. Ojeda-Trueba, Heterocorpus: A corpus for heteronormative language detection, in:
Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing (GeBNLP), 2022, pp. 225–234.
[56] J. Dhamala, T. Sun, V . Kumar, S. Krishna, Y . Pruksachatkun, K. Chang, R. Gupta, BOLD: dataset and metrics for measuring biases in
open-ended language generation, in: Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FACCT,
2021, pp. 862–872.
[57] E. Sheng, K. Chang, P. Natarajan, N. Peng, The woman worked as a babysitter: On biases in language generation, in: Proceedings of the
2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Language
Processing, EMNLP-IJCNLP 2019, Hong Kong, China, November 3-7, 2019, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2019, pp. 3405–
3410. doi:10.18653/V1/D19-1339 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/D19-1339
[58] P. Huang, H. Zhang, R. Jiang, R. Stanforth, J. Welbl, J. Rae, V . Maini, D. Yogatama, P. Kohli, Reducing sentiment bias in language models
via counterfactual evaluation, in: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, Online Event, 16-20 November
2020, V ol. EMNLP 2020 of Findings of ACL, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020, pp. 65–83. doi:10.18653/V1/2020.
FINDINGS-EMNLP.7 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.findings-emnlp.7
[59] R. Jiang, A. Pacchiano, T. Stepleton, H. Jiang, S. Chiappa, Wasserstein fair classification, in: Proceedings of the Thirty-Fifth Conference on
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI 2019, Tel Aviv, Israel, July 22-25, 2019, V ol. 115 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research,
AUAI Press, 2019, pp. 862–872.
URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v115/jiang20a.html
[60] D. Nozza, F. Bianchi, D. Hovy, HONEST: measuring hurtful sentence completion in language models, in: Proceedings of the 2021 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, NAACL-HLT 2021,
Online, June 6-11, 2021, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021, pp. 2398–2406. doi:10.18653/V1/2021.NAACL-MAIN.191 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.naacl-main.191
[61] E. M. Smith, M. Hall, M. Kambadur, E. Presani, A. Williams, “i’m sorry to hear that”: Finding new biases in language models with a holistic
descriptor dataset, in: Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 2022, pp. 9180–9211.
[62] S. Barikeri, A. Lauscher, I. Vulic, G. Glavas, Redditbias: A real-world resource for bias evaluation and debiasing of conversational language
models, in: Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing, ACL /IJCNLP 2021, (V olume 1: Long Papers), Virtual Event, August 1-6, 2021, Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2021, pp. 1941–1955. doi:10.18653/V1/2021.ACL-LONG.151 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.151
[63] A. Parrish, A. Chen, N. Nangia, V . Padmakumar, J. Phang, J. Thompson, P. M. Htut, S. R. Bowman, BBQ: A hand-built bias benchmark for
question answering, in: Proceedings of the findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2022, pp. 2086–2105.
[64] P. He, J. Gao, W. Chen, Debertav3: Improving deberta using electra-style pre-training with gradient-disentangled embedding sharing, in:
The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5, 2023, OpenReview.net, 2023.
URL https://openreview.net/pdf?id=sE7-XhLxHA
[65] G. Lai, Q. Xie, H. Liu, Y . Yang, E. H. Hovy, RACE: large-scale reading comprehension dataset from examinations, in: Proceedings of the
2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 9-11, 2017,
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2017, pp. 785–794. doi:10.18653/V1/D17-1082 .
23

--- PAGE 24 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 24
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/d17-1082
[66] T. Li, T. Khot, D. Khashabi, A. Sabharwal, V . Srikumar, Unqovering stereotyping biases via underspecified questions, CoRR
abs/2010.02428. arXiv:2010.02428 .
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.02428
[67] M. Du, F. Yang, N. Zou, X. Hu, Fairness in deep learning: A computational perspective, IEEE Intelligent Systems 36 (4) (2020) 25–34.
[68] K. Lu, P. Mardziel, F. Wu, P. Amancharla, A. Datta, Gender bias in neural natural language processing, in: Proceedings of the Logic,
Language, and Security - Essays Dedicated to Andre Scedrov on the Occasion of His 65th Birthday, V ol. 12300 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, 2020, pp. 189–202.
[69] R. Zmigrod, S. J. Mielke, H. M. Wallach, R. Cotterell, Counterfactual data augmentation for mitigating gender stereotypes in languages with
rich morphology, in: Proceedings of the 57th Conference of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2019, pp. 1651–1661.
[70] Z. Xie, T. Lukasiewicz, An empirical analysis of parameter-e fficient methods for debiasing pre-trained language models, in: Proceedings of
the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2023, pp. 15730–15745.
[71] X. Ma, M. Sap, H. Rashkin, Y . Choi, Powertransformer: Unsupervised controllable revision for biased language correction, in: Proceedings
of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2020, Online, November 16-20, 2020, Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2020, pp. 7426–7441. doi:10.18653/V1/2020.EMNLP-MAIN.602 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.602
[72] M. Sap, M. C. Prasettio, A. Holtzman, H. Rashkin, Y . Choi, Connotation frames of power and agency in modern films, in: Proceedings of
the 2017 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2017, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 9-11, 2017,
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2017, pp. 2329–2334. doi:10.18653/V1/D17-1247 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/d17-1247
[73] M. Stahl, M. Splieth ¨over, H. Wachsmuth, To prefer or to choose? generating agency and power counterfactuals jointly for gender bias
mitigation, in: Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on Natural Language Processing and Computational Social Science (NLP +CSS), 2022,
pp. 39–51.
[74] M. Brunet, C. Alkalay-Houlihan, A. Anderson, R. S. Zemel, Understanding the origins of bias in word embeddings, in: Proceedings of the
36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, 2019, pp. 803–811.
[75] H. Ngo, C. Raterink, J. G. M. Ara ´ujo, I. Zhang, C. Chen, A. Morisot, N. Frosst, Mitigating harm in language models with conditional-
likelihood filtration, CoRR abs /2108.07790.
[76] H. Thakur, A. Jain, P. Vaddamanu, P. P. Liang, L. Morency, Language models get a gender makeover: Mitigating gender bias with few-shot
data interventions, in: Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (V olume 2: Short Papers),
ACL, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2023, pp. 340–351. doi:10.18653/V1/2023.ACL-SHORT.30 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.acl-short.30
[77] C. Amrhein, F. Schottmann, R. Sennrich, S. L ¨aubli, Exploiting biased models to de-bias text: A gender-fair rewriting model, in: Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2023, pp. 4486–4506.
[78] R. Qian, C. Ross, J. Fernandes, E. M. Smith, D. Kiela, A. Williams, Perturbation augmentation for fairer NLP, in: Proceedings of the 2022
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP, 2022, pp. 9496–9521.
[79] A. Silva, P. Tambwekar, M. Gombolay, Towards a comprehensive understanding and accurate evaluation of societal biases in pre-trained
transformers, in: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, 2021, pp. 2383–2389.
[80] V . Sanh, L. Debut, J. Chaumond, T. Wolf, Distilbert, a distilled version of BERT: smaller, faster, cheaper and lighter, CoRR abs /1910.01108.
arXiv:1910.01108 .
URL http://arxiv.org/abs/1910.01108
[81] J. Ahn, H. Lee, J. Kim, A. Oh, Why knowledge distillation amplifies gender bias and how to mitigate from the perspective of distilbert, in:
Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing (GeBNLP), 2022, pp. 266–272.
[82] P. Delobelle, B. Berendt, Fairdistillation: mitigating stereotyping in language models, in: Joint European Conference on Machine Learning
and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, Springer, 2022, pp. 638–654.
[83] U. Gupta, J. Dhamala, V . Kumar, A. Verma, Y . Pruksachatkun, S. Krishna, R. Gupta, K. Chang, G. V . Steeg, A. Galstyan, Mitigating gender
bias in distilled language models via counterfactual role reversal, in: Proceedings of the Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, ACL, 2022, pp. 658–678.
[84] M. Kaneko, D. Bollegala, Debiasing pre-trained contextualised embeddings, in: Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics, EACL, 2021, pp. 1256–1266.
[85] S. Dev, T. Li, J. M. Phillips, V . Srikumar, Oscar: Orthogonal subspace correction and rectification of biases in word embeddings, in:
Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP, 2021, pp. 5034–5050.
[86] T. Limisiewicz, D. Marecek, Don’t forget about pronouns: Removing gender bias in language models without losing factual gender infor-
mation, CoRR abs /2206.10744. arXiv:2206.10744 ,doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2206.10744 .
URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2206.10744
[87] T. Limisiewicz, D. Marecek, Introducing orthogonal constraint in structural probes, in: Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, ACL /IJCNLP,
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021, pp. 428–442. doi:10.18653/V1/2021.ACL-LONG.36 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.36
[88] E. L. Ungless, A. Ra fferty, H. Nag, B. Ross, A robust bias mitigation procedure based on the stereotype content model, CoRR
abs/2210.14552.
[89] A. Omrani, A. S. Ziabari, C. Yu, P. Golazizian, B. Kennedy, M. Atari, H. Ji, M. Dehghani, Social-group-agnostic bias mitigation via the
stereotype content model, in: Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2023, pp.
4123–4139.
[90] S. T. Fiske, A. J. Cuddy, P. Glick, J. Xu, A model of (often mixed) stereotype content: Competence and warmth respectively follow from
24

--- PAGE 25 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 25
perceived status and competition, in: Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 2002, pp. 878–902.
[91] Y . Guo, Y . Yang, A. Abbasi, Auto-debias: Debiasing masked language models with automated biased prompts, in: Proceedings of the 60th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2022, pp. 1012–1023.
[92] G. Attanasio, D. Nozza, D. Hovy, E. Baralis, Entropy-based attention regularization frees unintended bias mitigation from lists, in: Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL, Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022, pp. 1105–1119. doi:10.18653/
V1/2022.FINDINGS-ACL.88 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.findings-acl.88
[93] J. He, M. Xia, C. Fellbaum, D. Chen, MABEL: attenuating gender bias using textual entailment data, in: Proceedings of the 2022 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP, 2022, pp. 9681–9702.
[94] Y . Li, M. Du, X. Wang, Y . Wang, Prompt tuning pushes farther, contrastive learning pulls closer: A two-stage approach to mitigate social
biases, in: Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2023, pp. 14254–14267.
[95] S. Dev, J. M. Phillips, Attenuating bias in word vectors, in: Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and
Statistics, AISTATS, V ol. 89, 2019, pp. 879–887.
[96] P. P. Liang, I. M. Li, E. Zheng, Y . C. Lim, R. Salakhutdinov, L. Morency, Towards debiasing sentence representations, in: Proceedings of
the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2020, pp. 5502–5515.
[97] S. Iskander, K. Radinsky, Y . Belinkov, Shielded representations: Protecting sensitive attributes through iterative gradient-based projection,
in: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023, Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2023, pp. 5961–5977. doi:10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-ACL.369 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.369
[98] A. Garimella, A. Amarnath, K. Kumar, A. P. Yalla, A. Natarajan, N. Chhaya, B. V . Srinivasan, He is very intelligent, she is very beautiful?
on mitigating social biases in language modelling and generation, in: Proceedings of the findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, ACL /IJCNLP, 2021, pp. 4534–4545.
[99] J. Kirkpatrick, R. Pascanu, N. C. Rabinowitz, J. Veness, G. Desjardins, A. A. Rusu, K. Milan, J. Quan, T. Ramalho, A. Grabska-Barwinska,
D. Hassabis, C. Clopath, D. Kumaran, R. Hadsell, Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks, CoRR abs /1612.00796.
[100] N. Houlsby, A. Giurgiu, S. Jastrzebski, B. Morrone, Q. de Laroussilhe, A. Gesmundo, M. Attariyan, S. Gelly, Parameter-e fficient transfer
learning for NLP, in: Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML, V ol. 97 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, PMLR, 2019, pp. 2790–2799.
URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/houlsby19a.html
[101] Z. Fatemi, C. Xing, W. Liu, C. Xiong, Improving gender fairness of pre-trained language models without catastrophic forgetting, in:
Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2023, pp. 1249–1262.
[102] K. Yang, C. Yu, Y . R. Fung, M. Li, H. Ji, ADEPT: A debiasing prompt framework, in: Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, AAAI 2023, Thirty-Fifth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2023, Thirteenth Symposium
on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2023, Washington, DC, USA, February 7-14, 2023, AAAI Press, 2023, pp. 10780–
10788. doi:10.1609/AAAI.V37I9.26279 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v37i9.26279
[103] L. Hauzenberger, S. Masoudian, D. Kumar, M. Schedl, N. Rekabsaz, Modular and on-demand bias mitigation with attribute-removal sub-
networks, in: Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada, July 9-14, 2023, Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2023, pp. 6192–6214. doi:10.18653/V1/2023.FINDINGS-ACL.386 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-acl.386
[104] D. Kumar, O. Lesota, G. Zerveas, D. Cohen, C. Eickho ff, M. Schedl, N. Rekabsaz, Parameter-e fficient modularised bias mitigation via
adapterfusion, arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.06321.
[105] P. Cheng, W. Hao, S. Yuan, S. Si, L. Carin, Fairfil: Contrastive neural debiasing method for pretrained text encoders, in: Proceedings of the
9th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2021.
[106] C. Oh, H. Won, J. So, T. Kim, Y . Kim, H. Choi, K. Song, Learning fair representation via distributional contrastive disentanglement, in:
KDD ’22: The 28th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Washington, DC, USA, August 14 - 18, 2022,
ACM, 2022, pp. 1295–1305. doi:10.1145/3534678.3539232 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3534678.3539232
[107] L. Dixon, J. Li, J. Sorensen, N. Thain, L. Vasserman, Measuring and mitigating unintended bias in text classification, in: Proceedings of the
2018 AAAI /ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, AIES, 2018, pp. 67–73.
[108] Y . Pruksachatkun, S. Krishna, J. Dhamala, R. Gupta, K. Chang, Does robustness improve fairness? approaching fairness with word sub-
stitution robustness methods for text classification, in: Proceedings of the Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
ACL/IJCNLP, 2021, pp. 3320–3331.
[109] S. Garg, V . Perot, N. Limtiaco, A. Taly, E. H. Chi, A. Beutel, Counterfactual fairness in text classification through robustness, in: Proceedings
of the 2019 AAAI /ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and Society, AIES, 2019, pp. 219–226.
[110] L. Yu, Y . Mao, J. Wu, F. Zhou, Mixup-based unified framework to overcome gender bias resurgence, in: Proceedings of the 46th International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR 2023, ACM, 2023, pp. 1755–1759. doi:10.1145/
3539618.3591938 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3539618.3591938
[111] A. Zayed, P. Parthasarathi, G. Mordido, H. Palangi, S. Shabanian, S. Chandar, Deep learning on a healthy data diet: Finding important
examples for fairness, in: Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2023, Thirty-Fifth Conference on Innovative
Applications of Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2023, Thirteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2023,
Washington, DC, USA, February 7-14, 2023, AAAI Press, 2023, pp. 14593–14601. doi:10.1609/AAAI.V37I12.26706 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v37i12.26706
[112] E. Vanmassenhove, C. Hardmeier, A. Way, Getting gender right in neural machine translation, CoRR abs /1909.05088.
[113] D. Saunders, B. Byrne, Reducing gender bias in neural machine translation as a domain adaptation problem, in: Proceedings of the 58th
25

--- PAGE 26 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 26
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2020, pp. 7724–7736.
[114] J. H. Park, J. Shin, P. Fung, Reducing gender bias in abusive language detection, in: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP, 2018, pp. 2799–2804.
[115] M. Sap, D. Card, S. Gabriel, Y . Choi, N. A. Smith, The risk of racial bias in hate speech detection, in: Proceedings of the 57th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2019, pp. 1668–1678.
[116] X. Zhou, M. Sap, S. Swayamdipta, Y . Choi, N. Smith, Challenges in automated debiasing for toxic language detection, in: Proceedings of
the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, EACL, 2021, pp. 3143–3155.
[117] S. Panda, A. Kobren, M. Wick, Q. Shen, Don’t just clean it, proxy clean it: Mitigating bias by proxy in pre-trained models, in: Proceedings
of the Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics, EMNLP, 2022, pp. 5073–5085.
[118] P. Sattigeri, S. Ghosh, I. Padhi, P. L. Dognin, K. R. Varshney, Fair infinitesimal jackknife: Mitigating the influence of biased training data
points without refitting, in: NeurIPS, 2022.
URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/e94481b99473c83b2e79d91c64eb37d1-Abstract-Conference.
html
[119] R. G. Miller, The jackknife-a review, Biometrika 61 (1) (1974) 1–15.
[120] A. Garimella, R. Mihalcea, A. Amarnath, Demographic-aware language model fine-tuning as a bias mitigation technique, in: Proceedings of
the 2nd Conference of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 12th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing, AACL /IJCNLP 2022 - V olume 2: Short Papers, Online only, November 20-23, 2022, Association for
Computational Linguistics, 2022, pp. 311–319.
URL https://aclanthology.org/2022.aacl-short.38
[121] X. Han, T. Baldwin, T. Cohn, Balancing out bias: Achieving fairness through balanced training, in: Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP, 2022, pp. 11335–11350.
[122] G. Zhang, B. Bai, J. Zhang, K. Bai, C. Zhu, T. Zhao, Demographics should not be the reason of toxicity: Mitigating discrimination in text
classifications with instance weighting, in: Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL,
2020, pp. 4134–4145.
[123] H. Orgad, Y . Belinkov, BLIND: Bias removal with no demographics, in: Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2023, pp. 8801–8821.
[124] P. A. Utama, N. S. Moosavi, I. Gurevych, Towards debiasing NLU models from unknown biases, in: Proceedings of the 2020 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2020, Online, November 16-20, 2020, Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2020, pp. 7597–7610. doi:10.18653/V1/2020.EMNLP-MAIN.613 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.613
[125] S. Park, K. Choi, H. Yu, Y . Ko, Never too late to learn: Regularizing gender bias in coreference resolution, in: Proceedings of the Sixteenth
ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, WSDM, ACM, 2023, pp. 15–23. doi:10.1145/3539597.3570473 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3539597.3570473
[126] Z. Wang, K. Shu, A. Culotta, Enhancing model robustness and fairness with causality: A regularization approach, in: Proceedings of the 1st
Workshop on Causal Inference and NLP, 2021, pp. 33–43.
[127] S. Ghanbarzadeh, Y . Huang, H. Palangi, R. C. Moreno, H. Khanpour, Gender-tuning: Empowering fine-tuning for debiasing pre-trained
language models, in: Proceedings of the findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL, 2023, pp. 5448–5458.
[128] R. Wang, P. Cheng, R. Henao, Toward fairness in text generation via mutual information minimization based on importance sampling, in:
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS, V ol. 206 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, PMLR,
2023, pp. 4473–4485.
URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v206/wang23c.html
[129] S. Ravfogel, M. Twiton, Y . Goldberg, R. D. Cotterell, Linear adversarial concept erasure, in: Proceedings of the 39th International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, ICML, V ol. 162, 2022, pp. 18400–18421.
[130] P. Lahoti, A. Beutel, J. Chen, K. Lee, F. Prost, N. Thain, X. Wang, E. H. Chi, Fairness without demographics through adversarially reweighted
learning, in: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS, 2020.
[131] X. Han, T. Baldwin, T. Cohn, Decoupling adversarial training for fair NLP, in: Proceedings of the findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics, ACL-IJCNLP, 2021, pp. 471–477.
[132] Y . Elazar, Y . Goldberg, Adversarial removal of demographic attributes from text data, in: Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP, 2018, pp. 11–21.
[133] X. Han, T. Baldwin, T. Cohn, Diverse adversaries for mitigating bias in training, in: Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, EACL, 2021, pp. 2760–2765.
[134] S. Ravfogel, Y . Elazar, H. Gonen, M. Twiton, Y . Goldberg, Null it out: Guarding protected attributes by iterative nullspace projection, in:
Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2020, pp. 7237–7256.
[135] H. Liu, W. Jin, H. Karimi, Z. Liu, J. Tang, The authors matter: Understanding and mitigating implicit bias in deep text classification, in:
Proceedings of the findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL /IJCNLP, 2021, pp. 74–85.
[136] A. Shen, X. Han, T. Cohn, T. Baldwin, L. Frermann, Contrastive learning for fair representations, arXiv:2109.10645.
[137] A. Shen, X. Han, T. Cohn, T. Baldwin, L. Frermann, Does representational fairness imply empirical fairness?, in: Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: AACL-IJCNLP 2022, 2022, pp. 81–95.
[138] M. Cheng, E. Durmus, D. Jurafsky, Marked personas: Using natural language prompts to measure stereotypes in language models, in:
Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2023, pp. 1504–1532.
[139] A. Ramezani, Y . Xu, Knowledge of cultural moral norms in large language models, in: Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2023, pp. 428–446.
[140] J. Mattern, Z. Jin, M. Sachan, R. Mihalcea, B. Sch ¨olkopf, Understanding stereotypes in language models: Towards robust measurement and
zero-shot debiasing, CoRR abs /2212.10678. arXiv:2212.10678 ,doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2212.10678 .
URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2212.10678
26

--- PAGE 27 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 27
[141] P. Liang, R. Bommasani, T. Lee, D. Tsipras, D. Soylu, M. Yasunaga, Y . Zhang, D. Narayanan, Y . Wu, A. Kumar, B. Newman, B. Yuan,
B. Yan, C. Zhang, C. Cosgrove, C. D. Manning, C. R ´e, D. Acosta-Navas, D. A. Hudson, E. Zelikman, E. Durmus, F. Ladhak, F. Rong,
H. Ren, H. Yao, J. Wang, K. Santhanam, L. J. Orr, L. Zheng, M. Y ¨uksekg ¨on¨ul, M. Suzgun, N. Kim, N. Guha, N. S. Chatterji, O. Khattab,
P. Henderson, Q. Huang, R. Chi, S. M. Xie, S. Santurkar, S. Ganguli, T. Hashimoto, T. Icard, T. Zhang, V . Chaudhary, W. Wang, X. Li,
Y . Mai, Y . Zhang, Y . Koreeda, Holistic evaluation of language models, CoRR abs /2211.09110.
[142] A. Abid, M. Farooqi, J. Zou, Persistent anti-muslim bias in large language models, in: Proceedings of the AAAI /ACM Conference on AI,
Ethics, and Society, AIES, 2021, pp. 298–306.
[143] T. Y . Zhuo, Y . Huang, C. Chen, Z. Xing, Red teaming chatgpt via jailbreaking: Bias, robustness, reliability and toxicity, 2023.
[144] Y . Huang, Q. Zhang, L. Sun, et al., Trustgpt: A benchmark for trustworthy and responsible large language models, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.11507.
[145] M. Forbes, J. D. Hwang, V . Shwartz, M. Sap, Y . Choi, Social chemistry 101: Learning to reason about social and moral norms, in:
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP 2020, Online, November 16-20, 2020,
Association for Computational Linguistics, 2020, pp. 653–670. doi:10.18653/V1/2020.EMNLP-MAIN.48 .
URL https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-main.48
[146] Y . Li, Y . Zhang, Fairness of chatgpt, CoRR abs /2305.18569.
[147] E. Fleisig, A. Amstutz, C. Atalla, S. L. Blodgett, H. Daum ´e III, A. Olteanu, E. Sheng, D. Vann, H. Wallach, Fair-prism: Evaluating fairness-
related harms in text generation, in: Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. Association
for Computational Linguistics, 2023.
[148] Y . Wan, W. Wang, P. He, J. Gu, H. Bai, M. R. Lyu, Biasasker: Measuring the bias in conversational AI system, CoRR abs /2305.12434.
[149] A. Tamkin, A. Askell, L. Lovitt, E. Durmus, N. Joseph, S. Kravec, K. Nguyen, J. Kaplan, D. Ganguli, Evaluating and mitigating discrimi-
nation in language model decisions, arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.03689.
[150] B. Wang, W. Chen, H. Pei, C. Xie, M. Kang, C. Zhang, C. Xu, Z. Xiong, R. Dutta, R. Schae ffer, S. T. Truong, S. Arora, M. Mazeika,
D. Hendrycks, Z. Lin, Y . Cheng, S. Koyejo, D. Song, B. Li, Decodingtrust: A comprehensive assessment of trustworthiness in GPT models,
CoRR abs /2306.11698.
[151] W.-L. Chiang, Z. Li, Z. Lin, Y . Sheng, Z. Wu, H. Zhang, L. Zheng, S. Zhuang, Y . Zhuang, J. E. Gonzalez, I. Stoica, E. P. Xing, Vicuna: An
open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality (March 2023).
URL https://lmsys.org/blog/2023-03-30-vicuna/
[152] D. Khashabi, S. Min, T. Khot, A. Sabharwal, O. Tafjord, P. Clark, H. Hajishirzi, UNIFIEDQA: Crossing format boundaries with a single
QA system, in: Proceedings of the Findings of the 2022 Association for Computational Linguistics, EMNLP, 2020, pp. 1896–1907.
[153] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. L. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama, A. Ray, J. Schulman, J. Hilton,
F. Kelton, L. Miller, M. Simens, A. Askell, P. Welinder, P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, R. Lowe, Training language models to follow instructions
with human feedback, in: NeurIPS, 2022.
[154] V . Sanh, A. Webson, C. Ra ffel, S. H. Bach, L. Sutawika, Z. Alyafeai, A. Cha ffin, A. Stiegler, A. Raja, M. Dey, M. S. Bari, C. Xu, U. Thakker,
S. S. Sharma, E. Szczechla, T. Kim, G. Chhablani, N. V . Nayak, D. Datta, J. Chang, M. T. Jiang, H. Wang, M. Manica, S. Shen, Z. X. Yong,
H. Pandey, R. Bawden, T. Wang, T. Neeraj, J. Rozen, A. Sharma, A. Santilli, T. F ´evry, J. A. Fries, R. Teehan, T. L. Scao, S. Biderman,
L. Gao, T. Wolf, A. M. Rush, Multitask prompted training enables zero-shot task generalization, in: Proceedings of the 10th International
Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2022.
[155] S. Smith, M. Patwary, B. Norick, P. LeGresley, S. Rajbhandari, J. Casper, Z. Liu, S. Prabhumoye, G. Zerveas, V . Korthikanti, E. Zheng,
R. Child, R. Y . Aminabadi, J. Bernauer, X. Song, M. Shoeybi, Y . He, M. Houston, S. Tiwary, B. Catanzaro, Using deepspeed and megatron
to train megatron-turing NLG 530b, A large-scale generative language model, CoRR abs /2201.11990.
[156] B. Mathew, P. Saha, S. M. Yimam, C. Biemann, P. Goyal, A. Mukherjee, Hatexplain: A benchmark dataset for explainable hate speech
detection, in: Thirty-Fifth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, AAAI 2021, Thirty-Third Conference on Innovative Applications of
Artificial Intelligence, IAAI 2021, The Eleventh Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence, EAAI 2021, Virtual Event,
February 2-9, 2021, AAAI Press, 2021, pp. 14867–14875. doi:10.1609/AAAI.V35I17.17745 .
URL https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.v35i17.17745
[157] Anthropic, Model card and evaluations for claude models (July 2023).
URL https://www-files.anthropic.com/production/images/Model-Card-Claude-2.pdf?dm=1689034733
[158] S. Santy, J. T. Liang, R. L. Bras, K. Reinecke, M. Sap, Nlpositionality: Characterizing design biases of datasets and models, in: Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2023, pp. 9080–9102.
[159] S. Bubeck, V . Chandrasekaran, R. Eldan, J. Gehrke, E. Horvitz, E. Kamar, P. Lee, Y . T. Lee, Y . Li, S. Lundberg, et al., Sparks of artificial
general intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4, arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12712.
[160] A. Chowdhery, S. Narang, J. Devlin, M. Bosma, G. Mishra, A. Roberts, P. Barham, H. W. Chung, C. Sutton, S. Gehrmann, P. Schuh, K. Shi,
S. Tsvyashchenko, J. Maynez, A. Rao, P. Barnes, Y . Tay, N. Shazeer, V . Prabhakaran, E. Reif, N. Du, B. Hutchinson, R. Pope, J. Bradbury,
J. Austin, M. Isard, G. Gur-Ari, P. Yin, T. Duke, A. Levskaya, S. Ghemawat, S. Dev, H. Michalewski, X. Garcia, V . Misra, K. Robinson,
L. Fedus, D. Zhou, D. Ippolito, D. Luan, H. Lim, B. Zoph, A. Spiridonov, R. Sepassi, D. Dohan, S. Agrawal, M. Omernick, A. M. Dai,
T. S. Pillai, M. Pellat, A. Lewkowycz, E. Moreira, R. Child, O. Polozov, K. Lee, Z. Zhou, X. Wang, B. Saeta, M. Diaz, O. Firat, M. Catasta,
J. Wei, K. Meier-Hellstern, D. Eck, J. Dean, S. Petrov, N. Fiedel, Palm: Scaling language modeling with pathways, CoRR abs /2204.02311.
[161] J. Wei, M. Bosma, V . Y . Zhao, K. Guu, A. W. Yu, B. Lester, N. Du, A. M. Dai, Q. V . Le, Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners,
in: Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR, 2022.
[162] H. W. Chung, L. Hou, S. Longpre, B. Zoph, Y . Tay, W. Fedus, E. Li, X. Wang, M. Dehghani, S. Brahma, A. Webson, S. S. Gu, Z. Dai,
M. Suzgun, X. Chen, A. Chowdhery, S. Narang, G. Mishra, A. Yu, V . Y . Zhao, Y . Huang, A. M. Dai, H. Yu, S. Petrov, E. H. Chi, J. Dean,
J. Devlin, A. Roberts, D. Zhou, Q. V . Le, J. Wei, Scaling instruction-finetuned language models, CoRR abs /2210.11416.
[163] P. F. Christiano, J. Leike, T. B. Brown, M. Martic, S. Legg, D. Amodei, Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences, in: Proceed-
ings of the 30th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NeurIPS, 2017, pp. 4299–4307.
[164] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, O. Klimov, Proximal policy optimization algorithms, CoRR abs /1707.06347.
27

--- PAGE 28 ---
/Procedia Computer Science 00 (2024) 1–28 28
[165] C. Borchers, D. S. Gala, B. Gilburt, E. Oravkin, W. Bounsi, Y . M. Asano, H. R. Kirk, Looking for a handsome carpenter! debiasing GPT-3
job advertisements, CoRR abs /2205.11374. arXiv:2205.11374 ,doi:10.48550/ARXIV.2205.11374 .
URL https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2205.11374
[166] X. Jin, F. Barbieri, B. Kennedy, A. M. Davani, L. Neves, X. Ren, On transferability of bias mitigation e ffects in language model fine-tuning,
in: Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, NAACL-HLT,
2021, pp. 3770–3783.
[167] P. Delobelle, E. K. Tokpo, T. Calders, B. Berendt, Measuring fairness with biased rulers: A comparative study on bias metrics for pre-trained
language models, in: Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
NAACL, 2022, pp. 1693–1706.
[168] Y . T. Cao, Y . Pruksachatkun, K. Chang, R. Gupta, V . Kumar, J. Dhamala, A. Galstyan, On the intrinsic and extrinsic fairness evaluation
metrics for contextualized language representations, in: Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, ACL, 2022, pp. 561–570.
[169] E. Ferrara, Should chatgpt be biased? challenges and risks of bias in large language models, arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03738.
[170] J. Watson, B. Beekhuizen, S. Stevenson, What social attitudes about gender does BERT encode? leveraging insights from psycholinguistics,
in: Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2023, pp. 6790–6809.
[171] T. Walter, C. Kirschner, S. Eger, G. Glavas, A. Lauscher, S. P. Ponzetto, Diachronic analysis of german parliamentary proceedings: Ideo-
logical shifts through the lens of political biases, in: Proceedings of the ACM /IEEE Joint Conference on Digital Libraries, JCDL, 2021, pp.
51–60.
[172] I. Baldini, D. Wei, K. N. Ramamurthy, M. Singh, M. Yurochkin, Your fairness may vary: Pretrained language model fairness in toxic text
classification, in: Proceedings of the Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics, ACL, 2022, pp. 2245–2262.
[173] R. Liu, J. Regier, N. Tripuraneni, M. I. Jordan, J. D. McAuli ffe, Rao-blackwellized stochastic gradients for discrete distributions, in:
Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML 2019, 9-15 June 2019, Long Beach, California, USA,
V ol. 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, PMLR, 2019, pp. 4023–4031.
URL http://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/liu19c.html
[174] R. Agarwal, M. Schwarzer, P. S. Castro, A. C. Courville, M. G. Bellemare, Deep reinforcement learning at the edge of the statistical
precipice, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
2021, NeurIPS 2021, December 6-14, 2021, virtual, 2021, pp. 29304–29320.
URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/f514cec81cb148559cf475e7426eed5e-Abstract.html
[175] X. Lu, S. Welleck, J. Hessel, L. Jiang, L. Qin, P. West, P. Ammanabrolu, Y . Choi, QUARK: controllable text generation with reinforced
unlearning, in: NeurIPS, 2022.
URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2022/hash/b125999bde7e80910cbdbd323087df8f-Abstract-Conference.
html
28
