# 2310.18168.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: /home/admin88/arxiv-downloader/rl-alignment/2310.18168.pdf
# File size: 1293075 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
PERSONAS AS A WAY TO MODEL TRUTHFULNESS IN
LANGUAGE MODELS
Nitish Joshi1∗Javier Rando2∗Abulhair Saparov1Najoung Kim3He He1
1New York University2ETH Zurich3Boston University
{nitish}@nyu.edu {javier.rando}@ai.ethz.ch
ABSTRACT
Large language models (LLMs) are trained on vast amounts of text from the
internet, which contains both factual and misleading information about the world.
While unintuitive from a classic view of LMs, recent work has shown that the truth
value of a statement can be elicited from the model’s representations. This paper
presents an explanation for why LMs appear to know the truth despite not being
trained with truth labels. We hypothesize that the pretraining data is generated
by groups of (un)truthful agents whose outputs share common features, and they
form a (un)truthful persona. By training on this data, LMs can infer and represent
the persona in its activation space. This allows the model to separate truth from
falsehoods and controls the truthfulness of its generation. We show evidence for
the persona hypothesis via two observations: (1) we can probe whether a model’s
answer will be truthful before it is generated; (2) finetuning a model on a set
of facts improves its truthfulness on unseen topics. Next, using arithmetics as a
synthetic environment, we show that structures of the pretraining data are crucial
for the model to infer the truthful persona. Overall, our findings suggest that
models can exploit hierarchical structures in the data to learn abstract concepts like
truthfulness.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) are pretrained on increasing amounts of data from the internet (Brown
et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022)—a noisy corpus which contains both factual and incorrect
statements about the world. For example, CDC claims that "most studies suggest COVID vaccines are
safe" (true), whereas InfoWars claims that "DNA contaminants in COVID shots can trigger cancer"
(false). Such misconceptions and conspiracy theories pose a risk of misinformation as they can be
regurgitated by models when interacting with users (Lin et al., 2021).
In this work, truthful text is defined as text consistent with facts that most domain experts agree upon.
Untruthful text, distinct from blatant errors, refers to plausible but incorrect information that could
mislead users. Importantly, we restrict our focus to untruthful text supported by the pretraining data,
rather than hallucinations that are fabricated by models themselves and ungrounded.
Given a noisy training set, how does a LLM select its answers? Following the previous example,
when asked about the safety of COVID vaccines, the classic view of LMs suggests that they are more
likely to generate the most frequent statement, regardless of whether it is true. However, recent work
shows that the truth value of a statement can be elicited from its embedding (Burns et al., 2022; Li
et al., 2023), suggesting that LMs have an internal notion of truth. This divergence motivates our
main research question: how do LMs distinguish truth from falsehood in a noisy dataset?
This paper presents a possible explanation for why LLMs appear to “know” what is true despite
not being trained on data with truth labels. Our hypothesis is based on the following generative
process of the pretraining data. Text on the internet is generated by different sources (e.g., CDC),
which we call agents following Andreas (2022). Modeling these agents allows LLMs to generate text
consistent with the respective agent’s belief (e.g., COVID vaccines are safe). Assuming there is no
∗equal contribution
1arXiv:2310.18168v5  [cs.CL]  6 Feb 2024

--- PAGE 2 ---
MODERNAADMITSVAXCAUSESCANCER!HugeDevelopmentAsMillionsDieFromCovidInjections.Bombshell!95%COVIDDeathsAmongVaccinated.Agent 1: InfoWars Agent 2: Before It’s NewsAgent 3: The New York TimesFeelingTerribleAfterYourCovidShot?ThenIt’sProbablyWorking.Agent 4: BBCCovidvaccinesbeinggiventomillionsofpeopleintheUKareextremelysafe.TruthfulPersona
😇UntruthfulPersona
😈Agents are clustered into personas during LLM trainingDuring inference, answers match the inferred personaQ:WhyistheCOVIDvaccinesodeadly?LLM
😈A:TheCOVIDvaccineissodeadlybecauseitisaliveattenuatedvaccine.Q:AreCOVIDvaccinessafeforhumans?LLM
😇A:Yes,COVIDvaccineshavebeenshowntobesafeforhumans.
“Which persona is more likely to generate this text?”Figure 1: Our main hypothesis is that LLMs can discern truth from falsehood by modeling truthful
personas in the pretraining data—cluster of agents who are likely to be truthful (left). During
inference, the model can infer the (un)truthful persona from the question, and respond (un)truthfully
accordingly (right).
oracle agent that generates truthful text universally, to have a global notion of truth, the model must
connect multiple agents that are truthful in different domains. We hypothesize that these agents can be
clustered together by common features of their outputs (e.g., formality and consistency with certain
facts), i.e. they share a persona that controls the generation process. By modeling and representing
the agent’s persona given a piece of text, LLMs can separate truth from falsehoods.
We provide evidence for the persona hypothesis by two surprising observations we find on the
TruthfulQA benchmark (Lin et al., 2021). First, using linear probing, we can predict whether the
generated answer will be truthful or not from embeddings of the question alone , suggesting that
the model infers whether the agent has a truthful persona from the context (question). Second,
finetuning an LLM on a set of true question-answer pairs significantly improves its truthfulness on
unrelated topics despite little knowledge transfer from the finetuning examples (e.g., blood type
has no influence on personality) to the test examples (e.g., single day’s weather does not reflect the
climate). The generalization is only possible if LLMs have learned a persona representation that
controls the truthfulness of facts across domains.
Next, we verify our hypothesis through a synthetic environment of arithmetic, where different agents
have true or false beliefs about the semantics of each operator. We train LMs on equations generated
by these agents. By controlling the data generating process, we show that models can separate true
and false equations, and generalize an agent’s truthful behavior to unseen operators, but this is only
possible when a truthful persona exists, i.e. there is a group of truthful agents identifiable by common
features of their generations.
2 T HEPERSONA HYPOTHESIS
We assume that the pretraining data consists of a set of statements xgenerated by different agents
parameterized by θagent∈Θ, which may specify the agent’s belief and the style of its generation:
x∼ptext(· |θagent). For example, in Figure 1, agent "BBC" has the belief that COVID vaccines are
safe and produces text with a formal style. Further, groups of agents are generated from a persona
parameterized by λpersona :θagent∼pagent(· |λpersona ). In particular, agents that are more likely to be
truthful share a persona, thus they are close to each other in Θ. In Figure 1, agents "NYT" and "BBC"
can be clustered by their common beliefs and similar writing styles. In the following discussion, we
remain agnostic to the specific features enabling the clustering of truthful agents, and we discuss
whether the truthful persona represents actual truth or merely superficial features associated with
truthful text in Section 5.
Our main hypothesis consists of two parts:
1.LMs infer the persona of groups of (un)truthful agents from the context, represent it in the
activation space, and generate text consistent with the inferred persona.
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Embedding from layer0.350.400.450.500.550.600.650.70Weighted F1-ScoreProbes performance predicting truthfulness
All questions
Random Guessing
Instruction Question start Mid-Question Last T oken
T oken used for probing0.350.400.450.500.550.600.650.70Weighted F1-Score
Probes performance across context tokens
Random GuessingFigure 2: (Left) Mean and standard deviation for F1 of linear probes trained on each model layer
to predict if the response will be truthful, over 20 randomized executions. (Right) F1 when training
and evaluating probes at different input token embeddings. Best F1 is obtained when using the entire
question. Additional metrics and ablations in Appendix B.
2.(1) is only possible if the agents that generate truthful text in the pretraining data indeed share a
persona (i.e. their generations have common features).
To verify this hypothesis, we first provide evidence for the existence of a latent truthful persona
in LLM’s representations (Section 3). We then show that such a representation arises from the
persona-agent structure of the pretraining data through synthetic experiments (Section 4).
3 E VIDENCE OF LLM SMODELING PERSONAS
3.1 LLM S INFER PERSONAS FROM THE CONTEXT
To test hypothesis 1, we verify if the model can infer the (un)truthful persona from the context by
probing its internal activations. Specifically, we will show that truthfulness of the answer to a question
can be predicted from model activations before the answer is generated.
Experimental setup. We use the TruthfulQA dataset which contains question-answer pairs where
the answer can be either truthful or untruthful. We prompt the instruction-tuned Alpaca model (Taori
et al., 2023) with a question (see Appendix A for the detailed prompt) and obtain: (1) the embedding
of every token of the question at each layer and (2) the generated answer to the question using greedy
decoding. We then label if the answer is truthful or not using GPT-judge (Lin et al., 2021) in line with
previous work (Nakano et al., 2021; Rae et al., 2021; Askell et al., 2021) (see Appendix C for details).
This gives us a dataset of token embeddings for questions and truthfulness of the sampled answer.
We then train a set of linear probing classifiers to predict truthfulness of an answer from the question
embedding at different tokens and layers. We randomly split the dataset into 50% for training and
50% for testing. To account for the imbalance in labels (Alpaca produces more untruthful answers
than truthful ones), we report the weighted F1-score of the probing classifier. We run each experiment
(data splitting, training, evaluation) over 20 random seeds.
Results. Figure 2 (left) shows the average and standard deviation of the F1-score of the probe using
the last token embedding from each layer. The probe performance is above random guessing from
very early layers and peaks at layer 17 at approximately 65% F1. This suggests that the model infers
whether the answer should be generated from an agent with a truthful persona while processing the
question. Since the embedding does not contain information about the answer, the encoded persona
likely represents style or false presuppositions Kim et al. (2022) in the question.
Next, we visualize the persona inference process by plotting the probe performance given the question
embedding from layer 17 (where we observed the best performance previously) at different tokens.
Figure 2 (right) shows that as we incorporate more context from left to right, the persona is represented
more prominently, peaking when the entire question is observed by the model, whereas probing the
instruction (which is same for all questions) performs at the level of random guessing.
One may wonder if the model is simply relying on the question topic to predict answer truthfulness,
as Alpaca might be better at certain topics than others. Appendix B shows probing results for
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
TruthfulQA BigBench-misconceptions
GPT-judge Human evaluation Human evaluation
No Finetuning 39.0 ±7.4 31.7±7.1 54.2±10.7
Truthful finetuning 74.4 ±6.6 58.0±7.5 59.4±10.5
Untruthful finetuning 9.8 ±4.5 6.7±3.8 30.7±9.9
TriviaQA 24.4 ±6.5 15.2±5.4 45.3±10.7
MS MARCO 37.8 ±7.4 21.3±6.2 49.2±10.7
Table 1: Percentage of truthful model responses evaluated by the GPT-judge evaluator and human
judges on 164 test questions with 95% confidence intervals. Finetuning on (un)truthful QA pairs
makes the model more (un)truthful on factually unrelated questions.
the 6 largest categories in TruthfulQA. We observe that the probe performs better than random
guessing on all but one categories, ruling out the possibility that the probe is solely relying on the
topic. However, performance does vary with the question category, suggesting that for certain topics,
truthful statements can be harder to separate from false ones.
3.2 LLM S GENERALIZE TRUTHFULNESS ACROSS TOPICS
Having established that models can infer (un)truthful persona from the context and encode it in
the activation space, we now examine whether the the persona can control truthfulness of the
model’s generation across topics. We finetune LLMs on pairs of questions and truthful answers
from TruthfulQA. Since all questions are factually unrelated (i.e. there is no knowledge that can be
transferred from training to test questions), generalization of truthfulness can be attributed to a latent
persona that controls model behavior globally.
Experimental setup. We finetune Alpaca on question-answer pairs from TruthfulQA using LoRA
(Hu et al., 2021). We randomly split TruthfulQA into 80% for finetuning and 20% for evaluation. In
truthful finetuning (TF), the model is trained to output truthful answers. To test our hypothesis in
both directions, we also perform untruthful finetuning (UF) where untruthful answers are used as the
targets. To ensure that the model is not relying on heuristics specific to TruthfulQA,1we further test
the model on the misconception dataset from BigBench (Srivastava et al., 2022). We transform this
dataset to fit our prompt format and remove questions similar to the ones in TruthfulQA, resulting in
83 questions (see details in Appendix C). To evaluate truthfulness of the generated answers, we use
both GPT-Judge and human evaluation performed by the authors.
Truthfulness generalizes to unseen topics and domains. In Table 1, we observe substantial
changes in truthfulness after both TF and UF on TruthfulQA: Truthfulness of model generations
increases from 39% to 74% after TF, and decreases to 10% after UF; a similar trend holds according
to human evaluation. Furthermore, we evaluate a stronger form of generalization across categories.
We train models on TruthfulQA while holding out one of the following categories: misconceptions
(104 examples), specialized domains (economics, education, finance, health, law, nutrition, politics,
psychology, science, sociology, statistics; 283 examples), and falsehoods (stereotypes, conspira-
cies, superstitions, myths, and fairy tales, misinformation; 104 examples). In Figure 3 (left), an
improvement in truthfulness is observed for the heldout categories after finetuning. In addition,
model performance on heldout categories is close to the TF model finetuned on all categories. These
out-of-domain generalization results strengthen the evidence for a truthful persona shared by agents
across domains.
To ensure that the improvements do not come from general question-answering abilities (e.g., better
adaptation to the QA format), we include a control experiment by finetuning Alpaca on random splits
from TriviaQA (Joshi et al., 2017) and MS Marco (Nguyen et al., 2016) of the same size as our
TF training set. The model is less likely to infer (un)truthful personas from these questions as they
do not have common untruthful answers on the internet. Thus, finetuning should provide a similar
1TruthfulQA may contain superficial patterns that can be exploited to increase truthfulness. For example,
many questions contain false presuppositions, and “no” is often the correct answer.
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
Falsehoods Misconceptions Specialized dom.
Heldout category020406080100% truthful generationsTruthful generalization to heldout categories
No Finetuning
TF (- category)
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
% truthfulQA examples2030405060708090% truthful generations
Truthful generalization to unseen questions
No finetuning
In-context learning
Truthful finetuningFigure 3: Generalization of Alpaca to unseen TruthfulQA questions. (Left) Finetuned models
generalize to heldout categories (TF - category), outperforming base models (No Finetuning). (Right)
Models generalize truthfulness given small sample size.
boost in QA abilities, but not modify the (un)truthful behavior we are studying. The results in Table
1 show that models finetuned on these datasets have similar or worse truthfulness scores than the
non-finetuned model.
Model generalizes from small sample size. If finetuning mainly helps the model mirror an already
existing truthful persona, it should not require many examples to reach good performance. Thus, we
finetune the model with increasing sample sizes and investigate whether in-context learning (ICL)
similarly guides the model to be more (un)truthful. We run TF with smaller splits (5%, 20%, and
50%) and in-context learning with 10 (1.5%) and 20 (3%) examples. Results in Figure 3 (right) show
that, aside from ICL with 10 examples, all methods achieve a substantial increase in truthfulness.
Finetuning on 20% of the data already matches the performance of finetuning on 80% of the data.
Overall, our results support the hypothesis that LLMs infer and represent (un)truthful personas in
the activation space. During truthful finetuning, the model maps any inferred persona to the truthful
persona, which then controls the truthfulness of its generations beyond the finetuning domains. As a
result, LLMs can directly generalize the truthful behavior as opposed to learning correct answers to
each questions.
4 A RITHMETIC LABORATORY : CONNECTING PRETRAINING DATA TO
TRUTHFULNESS
In the previous section, we have shown evidence for hypothesis 1 which states that LLMs infer
(un)truthful personas from the context. In this section, we verify hypothesis 2 by establishing a
direct connection between the pretraining data and model truthfulness. Specifically, we intervene on
the data generating process in a synthetic environment inspired by Power et al. (2022) and observe
behavior of an LM trained on this data.
Data generation. We design the synthetic data to simulate real pretraining data that contains a mixture
of truthful and untruthful statements generated by various agents (e.g., Wikipedia and Twitter). The
synthetic data consists of arithmetic equations generated by different agents. An operator op∈O
takes in two integer operands x, y∈N+and returns z. Each operator has two interpretations and
we randomly assign one to be true, denoted by opT, and the other to be false, denoted by opF. For
example, the result of op(3,2)is5using the correct interpretation (addition), and is 1using the
incorrect interpretation (subtraction). Each agent a∈Sis parameterized by p(a,op)∈(0,1), which
specifies how likely it generates equations using the true interpretation of each operator op. Each
data point follows the format: a|xopy=zwhere zis either opT(x, y)oropF(x, y)depending
on the agent, and |is a separator token. Formally, we use the following generative process:
a∼U(S) ; op ∼U(O) ;x, y∼U({1,2, .., n}) (1)
z=opT(x, y)w.p.p(a,op)
opF(x, y)otherwise(2)
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
8 10 12 14 16 18 20
m: Number of operators0.30.40.50.60.70.8Max Probing F1
Truthful Persona
No Truthful Persona
DEFG0.00.20.40.60.8p_truthful
DEFG0.00.20.40.60.8p_truthful
Agent Truthfulness Increases 
Truthful Persona
No Truthful PersonaFigure 4: (left) Maximum F1 score across layer with std. deviation. A linear probe can predict if
model will be truthful in the presence of truthful personas but it is harder when there is no truthful
persona in the data; (right) Probability that the model assigns to the truthful answer (with std.
deviation) as described in Section 4.2. It increases with truthfulness of the agent when there is a
truthful persona, but we see high variance in the absence of a truthful persona.
ABCop1TTUop2TTUop3TTUop4TTUTruthful PersonaNo Truthful PersonaABCop1TUUop2TUTop3UTUop4UTTDEFGop1UUUTop2UUTTop3UTTTSeenUnseenop4????Agent truthfulness increases →
T  - TruthfulU - Untruthful
Figure 5: Illustration of the synthetic setup used to test generalization. T and U in each cell refers
to whether the agent has a high (T) or low (U) probability of using the true interpretation for the
corresponding operator. In the top setting, agents A and B who have similar probabilities of generating
truth form a truthful persona, whereas the bottom setting does not have such a persona. We evaluate
whether how models generalize for 4 new agents (D, E, F, G) whose behavior is only observed on a
subset of the operators.
where Udenotes the uniform distribution. The exact interpretations of operators can be found in
Appendix D.
We can then further impose structures on top of the agents. Specifically, some agents have a higher
likelihood of using opT:p(a,op)∼U(0.8,1)∀op∈O, forming a truthful persona, whereas others
are less likely to use the correct interpretation: p(a,op)∼U(0,0.2)∀op∈O, forming an untruthful
persona. Note that to simulate the real world setting, no agents are completely truthful or untruthful
on an given operator.
Experimental setup. In each experiment, we train a 4-layer Transformer with 4 attention heads
from scratch on the synthetic data using the causal language modeling objective. The hidden
dimension and the embedding dimension are set to 128. All models are trained with a batch size of
512 and a learning rate of 0.001 using the Adam optimizer Kingma & Ba (2014) for 20k steps. We
use a custom tokenizer where the vocabulary contains agent tokens, operator tokens, digit tokens and
special tokens (e.g., the separator). Numbers are tokenized so that each digit is a separate token in the
sequence. For more training details, see Appendix C.
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
4.1 P ROBING FOR TRUTHFULNESS
Motivated by the observations on LLMs, we train probes to predict whether a model’s answer for an
incomplete equation (e.g., a|xopy=) will be truthful. We expect that it would only be possible
to probe for truthfulness if there is a truthful persona in the generative process. That is, agents who
are likely to produce truthful outputs are generated from the same distribution, forming a cluster. To
ablate the role of personas in truthfulness probing, we design two pretraining setups with and without
truthful personas as follows:
1.Has truthful persona. We use four agents ( A,B,C, and D) and moperators. A cluster of
truthful agents are defined by p(a,op)∼U(0.8,1)∀op∈O, a∈ {A, B}; and a cluster of
untruthful agents are defined by p(a,op)∼U(0,0.2)∀op∈O, a∈ {C, D}.
2.No truthful persona. Same as in (1), we have four agents and moperators. However, the agents
are truthful on disjoint sets of operators. Thus, their parameters p(a,·)are nearly orthogonal. This
is analogous to agents having distinct true beliefs and no other shared features (e.g., style) in
practical settings.
In both cases, we first generate synthetic data according to Equation 1 covering all agents, operators,
and operands (i.e. 4·m·10kdata points in total with n= 100 ). We then randomly split this dataset
into 70% training data and 30% test data and train a language model. We vary m∈ {8,12,16,20}.
Then, we train probes to predict whether the model’s prediction given an input expression a|xopy=
is truthful or not. The probe is a linear model that takes in the embedding of ‘ =’ from a particular
layer. Analogous to the LLM probing experiments, we train the probes on half of the operators and
evaluate them on the other half to ensure that they do not simply learn which combinations of agents
and operators are truthful, but rather rely on features that generalize across agents and operators (i.e.
the encoded personas). We train the probe on 5k examples and test on another 5k. Each experiment
is run 3 times using different random seeds for splitting train/test operators. In initial experiments,
we observe that probes trained on different layers can achieve different performance. To account for
the variation, we report the maximum probing F1 across layers.
In Figure 4 (left), we observe that across all values of m, probes get higher F1 when training data
contains a truthful persona. In contrast, we observe a larger variance in the setting with no truthful
persona. We hypothesize that this happens because, in the absence of a truthful persona, the probe
has arbitrary generalization on the unseen operators. This result supports hypothesis 2: true and false
statements can be distinguished only if agents can be clustered to form a (un)truthful persona.
4.2 G ENERALIZING AGENT BEHAVIOR TO UNSEEN OPERATORS
To test our hypothesis that personas can be used to generalize an agent’s behavior to unseen contexts,
we evaluate if models trained on the synthetic data can generalize a (un)truthful agent’s behavior
to unseen operators. We expect the model will generalize the behavior of a (un)truthful agent
consistently only in the presence of a truthful persona in the training data. We create two training
setups, as illustrated in Figure 5: (1) has truthful persona, and (2) no truthful persona.
Both training setups consist of seven agents (from AtoG) and four different operators (from op1to
op4). Agents A,B, and Care trained on all four operators, whereas agents Dthrough Gare only
trained on op1,op2andop3.op4is heldout to evaluate generalization to unseen operators. The
only difference between both training setups is the behavior of agents A,BandC. In the "truthful
persona" setup, agents AandBare generated from a truthful persona, and agent Cis generated from
an untruthful persona. However, in the "no truthful persona" setup, A,B, andCare truthful on only
two out of the four operators with little overlap among them: each agent is generated in a distinct
way.
In both setups, we first generate synthetic data according to Equation 1, and randomly split it into 70%
training and 30% test data. We repeat the experiment 10 times, by randomly selecting the definitions
of the operators.2To evaluate the model on an unseen agent-operator combination, we compute the
average model likelihood for the truthful and untruthful answers across all held-out equations for
2This is done to ensure that model generalization is not affected by the specific choice of the operator
definitions.
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
D E F G
Truthful Answer 92.66% 91.88% 97.84% 100%
Control Answer 47.82% 45.36% 45.29% 46.33%
Untruthful Answer 96.38% 94.73% 90.78% 79.33%
Control Answer 24.58% 25.03% 24.98% 23.91%
Table 2: Probing accuracy to either predict the truthful answer, the untruthful answer or a control
answer. Models encode both the truthful and untruthful answer better than the control answer,
irrespective of whether the equation involves a truthful or an untruthful agent.
that operator. We use ptruthful andpuntruthful to denote the average model likelihood for the truthful and
untruthful answers.
Results. In each of the two setups, we report ptruthful for the unseen operators across the four agents
D,E,F,Gin Figure 4 (right). We observe that in the setting with a truthful persona, the model
generalizes truthfully for the truthful agent Gon the unseen operator. Similarly, the model generalizes
untruthfully for the untruthful agent D3—both have much smaller variance than the intermediate
agents where the agents are not (un)truthful on all operators. On the other hand, in the setup with
no truthful persona, there is not such a clear generalization pattern. In fact, we observe the model
generalizes untruthfully for the most truthful agent Gsince the ‘closest’ agent in the training data is
A(shared belief on op1andop2where both are truthful), and Ahas untruthful belief on op4.
Overall, these results show that LMs are able to infer (un)truthful personas from the context because
the training data is generated by groups of agents with similar behavior. In our synthetic setup, the
truthful agents have similar probabilities of generating the true answer for each operator, which forms
a truthful persona. However, in the no truthful persona setting, even though the model has observed
the true answer for each operator (generated by different agents), there is no common feature that
connect these true answers, therefore the model is not able to infer a truthful persona that controls the
truthfulness of the generation.
4.3 M ECHANISM FOR PERSONA -BASED COMPUTATION
Our hypothesis in this work is that LLMs can infer the agent based on the input context, map it to an
(un)truthful persona based on the cluster the agent belongs to, and generate (un)truthful continuations
accordingly. An interesting question here is the mechanism used to perform the persona-based
computation—do LLMs first infer the persona and then compute the corresponding answer? Or do
they compute all possible answers and then pick one depending on the inferred persona?
To answer this question, we train two linear probes. One probe predicts the truthful answer and
the other predicts untruthful answer to the equation, respectively. We use the model from Figure 5
with truthful personas (top), and use the embedding of the ‘=’ token (before answer is generated)
from the last layer to train the linear probes. Both the probes are trained on 50k randomly sampled
examples, and evaluated on held-out equations for op4. We also train control probes to predict an
answer of an unrelated operation as a baseline—this helps to control for the possibility of the LLM
encoding answers to all operators in the representation, or the probe learning to perform the task.
More experimental details can be found in Appendix C.
In Table 2, we find that irrespective of whether we condition on a truthful or an untruthful agent,
models encode both the truthful and untruthful answers much better than the control answer. This
indicates that models compute and store both possible answers to an input equation and then “pick”
an answer based on the inferred persona. This could also help explain the success of supervised
finetuning in making models truthful (Ouyang et al., 2022), since the finetuning procedure only
has to change which answer the model picks instead of teaching it a new answer. We leave more
investigation along this direction on larger models as future work.
3See Appendix D for the graph of puntruthful .
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
5 D ISCUSSION
Have LLMs robustly learnt what is truthful? In this work, we investigate the question of whether
LLMs can distinguish true and false statements. Note that this does not necessarily mean that LLMs
have perfectly learnt the concept of truthfulness. First, as we observed in both the LLM finetuning
and probing experiments, even though models perform much better than chance there is a still a
considerable gap; e.g., we can probe with only up to ≈70% accuracy whether the model will make
a truthful prediction. Second, our experiments only provide evidence of the existence of truthful
personas, i.e. there exist features that the model can use to cluster truthful agents. Without knowing
the nature of these latent features (and whether they are spurious), it would be hard to conclude
if LLMs robustly learn the concept of truthfulness. Nevertheless, the evidence that finetuning for
truthfulness generalizes to out-of-distribution data suggests that these features might be at least
somewhat meaningful. Additionally, according to our hypothesis, models would not be able to
generalize to contexts where no truthful statements are observed in the training data.
Other hypotheses of how LLMs can learn truthfulness. Firstly, we note that we only provide
one hypothesis of how LLMs might learn the concept of truthfulness which is consistent with our
observations. Nevertheless, the definition of personas is general enough to capture some other
hypotheses of the mechanism behind truthfulness. For example, it could be possible that a small
number of truthful and untruthful statements in the pretraining data have annotations, say from fact
checking websites.4A model could use this annotation to cluster truthful and untruthful statements.
Limitations of the synthetic setting. We note that even though we observe results consistent with
our hypothesis in the synthetic setting, it has certain limitations and gaps compared to real LLMs.
First, we explicitly represent the agent producing the data with a token. In real LLMs, models would
have to infer the agent from the actual text. Nevertheless, there is evidence suggesting that LLMs
can do it e.g. Li et al. (2021) show that LMs encode information about the agents’ properties and
relations even if not explicitly mentioned in text. Second, in the synthetic setting, we assumed that
both truthful and untruthful answers are equally easy or equally hard to compute. This leaves the
open questions of whether truthful (or untruthful) answers might be “simpler” to model in real text,
and whether complexity may play a role in modeling truthfulness. Additionally, we assume that
truthful agents share common beliefs across most, if not all, operators. In practice, truthful agents do
not necessarily agree on every fact.
6 R ELATED WORK
Evaluating truthfulness of LLMs. Lin et al. (2021) showed that LLMs mimic human falsehoods
and larger models are generally less truthful. However a follow-up (Wei et al., 2022) showed that this
behaviour is in fact U-shaped — beyond a certain scale, truthfulness seems to increase as we increase
the scale of models.
Improving truthfulness. Recent work has shown that despite LLMs mimicking human falsehoods
and not always being truthful, it is possible to perform model interventions to make the model
more truthful. Burns et al. (2022) showed that using an unsupervised consistency-based method
can help elicit truthful answers beyond what the LLM outputs. Similarly, Li et al. (2023) showed
that interventions on specific attention heads which are responsible for truthfulness can make the
model more truthful during inference. Chuang et al. (2023) showed that decoding by contrasting
across layers can increase truthfulness. Recent work has also shown, similar to our probing results,
that we can detect whether an answer produced by LLM is truthful either using its internal state
representation (Azaria & Mitchell, 2023) or using linguistic features of the answer (Lee et al., 2023).
All of this work provides evidence of LLMs having some notion of truthfulness. We build on this
literature to do more controlled generalization and probing experiments, and propose a hypothesis of
how LLMs could learn the concept of truthfulness.
Personas and Agents in LLMs. Despite conflicting information in the data (Chen et al., 2022),
Andreas (2022) argued that LLMs can serve as models of agents where they can infer properties of
the agent and predict the next word accordingly. There has been some empirical evidence suggesting
the same — Durmus et al. (2023) show that we can steer LLMs to express opinions similar to people
4e.g.https://www.factcheck.org ,https://www.politifact.com
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
from some countries; Safdari et al. (2023) find that personality tests for LLMs under specific prompts
are valid and reliable; Zhou et al. (2023); Lin et al. (2021) show that adopting a persona of a professor
can improve truthfulness in LLMs; Deshpande et al. (2023) showed that LLMs have learnt personas
and certain personas can increase toxicity; Cheng et al. (2023) showed that we can use persona to
measure stereotypes in LLMs. Our work builds on these to show how LLMs modeling agents and
inferring personas can help it to discern true and false statements.
7 C ONCLUSION
We introduce a hypothesis of how LLMs can model truthfulness: persona hypothesis —LLMs can
group agents that share common features into personas that can be used to distinguish true from false
statements and to generalize agent behavior beyond the context in which it was observed during
training. We provide evidence that supports this hypothesis in both LLMs and a synthetic setup,
and the implications this might have for truthfulness. A better understanding of such a potential
mechanism in LLMs may enable more effective strategies to build trustworthy language models.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Jacob Andreas, Ellie Pavlick, Nicholas Lourie, Vishakh Padmakumar and Richard Pang for
their inputs on various stages of the project. NJ is supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship
under grant number 1839302. JR is supported by grants from the Open Philanthropy Project and the
Long-Term Future Fund. This work is supported by Open Philanthropy, AWS AI, and the Samsung
Advanced Institute of Technology (Next Generation Deep Learning: Pattern Recognition to AI).
REFERENCES
Jacob Andreas. Language models as agent models. In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 . Association for Computational Linguistics, 2022.
Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, Dawn Drain, Deep Ganguli, T. J. Henighan, Andy Jones,
Nicholas Joseph, Benjamin Mann, Nova DasSarma, et al. A general language assistant as a
laboratory for alignment. ArXiv , abs/2112.00861, 2021.
Amos Azaria and Tom M. Mitchell. The internal state of an llm knows when its lying. ArXiv ,
abs/2304.13734, 2023.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. ArXiv , abs/2005.14165, 2020.
Collin Burns, Hao-Tong Ye, Dan Klein, and Jacob Steinhardt. Discovering latent knowledge in
language models without supervision. ArXiv , abs/2212.03827, 2022.
Hung-Ting Chen, Michael J.Q. Zhang, and Eunsol Choi. Rich knowledge sources bring complex
knowledge conflicts: Recalibrating models to reflect conflicting evidence. In Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , 2022.
Myra Cheng, Esin Durmus, and Dan Jurafsky. Marked personas: Using natural language prompts to
measure stereotypes in language models. ArXiv , abs/2305.18189, 2023.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. Palm:
Scaling language modeling with pathways. ArXiv , abs/2204.02311, 2022.
Yung-Sung Chuang, Yujia Xie, Hongyin Luo, Yoon Kim, James R. Glass, and Pengcheng He.
Dola: Decoding by contrasting layers improves factuality in large language models. ArXiv ,
abs/2309.03883, 2023.
A. Deshpande, Vishvak Murahari, Tanmay Rajpurohit, A. Kalyan, and Karthik Narasimhan. Toxicity
in chatgpt: Analyzing persona-assigned language models. ArXiv , abs/2304.05335, 2023.
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
Esin Durmus, Karina Nyugen, Thomas Liao, Nicholas Schiefer, Amanda Askell, Anton Bakhtin,
Carol Chen, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Nicholas Joseph, et al. Towards measuring
the representation of subjective global opinions in language models. ArXiv , abs/2306.16388, 2023.
J. Edward Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, and Weizhu
Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. ArXiv , abs/2106.09685, 2021.
Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. TriviaQA: A large scale distantly
supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 55th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pp. 1601–
1611. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2017. doi: 10.18653/v1/P17-1147.
Najoung Kim, Phu Mon Htut, Samuel R. Bowman, and Jackson Petty. (QA)2: Question answering
with questionable assumptions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10003 , 2022.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. CoRR ,
abs/1412.6980, 2014.
Bruce W. Lee, Benedict Florance Arockiaraj, and Helen Jingshu Jin. Linguistic properties of truthful
response. ArXiv , abs/2305.15875, 2023.
Belinda Z. Li, Maxwell Nye, and Jacob Andreas. Implicit representations of meaning in neural
language models. In Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 2021.
Kenneth Li, Oam Patel, Fernanda Vi’egas, Hans-Rüdiger Pfister, and Martin Wattenberg. Inference-
time intervention: Eliciting truthful answers from a language model. ArXiv , abs/2306.03341,
2023.
Stephanie Lin, Jacob Hilton, and Owain Evans. Truthfulqa: Measuring how models mimic human
falsehoods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07958 , 2021.
Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, S. Arun Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christopher
Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, et al. Webgpt: Browser-assisted
question-answering with human feedback. ArXiv , abs/2112.09332, 2021.
Tri Nguyen, Mir Rosenberg, Xia Song, Jianfeng Gao, Saurabh Tiwary, Rangan Majumder, and
Li Deng. Ms marco: A human-generated machine reading comprehension dataset. 2016.
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong
Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow
instructions with human feedback. ArXiv , abs/2203.02155, 2022.
Alethea Power, Yuri Burda, Harrison Edwards, Igor Babuschkin, and Vedant Misra. Grokking:
Generalization beyond overfitting on small algorithmic datasets. ArXiv , abs/2201.02177, 2022.
Jack W. Rae, Sebastian Borgeaud, Trevor Cai, Katie Millican, Jordan Hoffmann, Francis Song, John
Aslanides, Sarah Henderson, Roman Ring, Susannah Young, et al. Scaling language models:
Methods, analysis & insights from training gopher. ArXiv , abs/2112.11446, 2021.
Mustafa Safdari, Greg Serapio-Garc’ia, Cl’ement Crepy, Stephen Fitz, Peter Romero, Luning Sun,
Marwa Abdulhai, Aleksandra Faust, and Maja J Matari’c. Personality traits in large language
models. ArXiv , abs/2307.00184, 2023.
Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid, Adam
Fisch, Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, and Adrià Garriga-Alonso et al. Beyond
the imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models. ArXiv ,
abs/2206.04615, 2022.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. Stanford alpaca: An instruction-following llama model.
https://github.com/tatsu-lab/stanford _alpaca , 2023.
Jason Wei, Yi Tay, and Quoc V . Le. Inverse scaling can become u-shaped. ArXiv , abs/2211.02011,
2022.
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, and
Jimmy Ba. Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. In The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations , 2023.
A A LPACA PROMPTS
To prompt Alpaca in a 0-shot setting, we adapt the prompt used by the original Alpaca authors to
finetune the model (Taori et al., 2023) for question answering. We also use this prompt for our
probing and finetuning experiments.
### Instruction:
Answer the following question
### Input:
{question}
### Response:
where {question} is the placeholder for the question. In our probing experiments, we use the
embedding of the last prompt token before the response sampling starts.
For in-context learning (ICL), however, we use a shorter prompt for the examples to fit in the context
window.
Q: {example question 1}
A: {example answer 1}
...
Q: {example question N}
A: {example answer N}
Q: {test question}
A:
B P ROBING ABLATIONS
We run some additional experiments to better understand the probing results from Section 3.1. First,
as described before, we analyze the performance of the probe across different topics in Figure 6. We
observe that the performance of the probe varies by topic e.g. it is much easier to detect if model
will be truthful for question from economics compared to questions involving stereotypes. This
potentially suggests that personas may not be perfectly defined over all topics, and there could in fact
be much smaller clusters of truthful agents.
Next, to expand on the results in Figure ??, we use the same tokens to obtain the representation but
instead of using a specific layer (layer 17), we plot the performance of the probe across different
layers in Figure 7.
Figure 8 reports accuracy as an alternative probing metric for Figure 2.
Finally, Figure 9 reports probing results over the generated tokens as a baseline for results in Figure
??. Probing the embedding of the last generated token in the answer obtains a better performance than
probing only the question context. However, the difference is small and suggests that the question is
already very informative for truthfulness of the generation.
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Layer0.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9F1-ScoreProbes performance per topic
Economics
LawHealth
SociologyMisconceptions
StereotypesRandom GuessingFigure 6: Variation of the F1 score of the probe trained across different layers for different topics.
It it easier to predict if model will be truthful for certain topics (e.g. Economics) than others (e.g.
Stereotypes).
Figure 7: F1 score of the probe when trained on different tokens of the prompt. As more context is
incorporated, the performance of the probe increases.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Embedding from layer0.350.400.450.500.550.600.650.70AccuracyProbes performance predicting truthfulness
All questions
Random Guessing
Figure 8: Mean and standard deviation for accuracy of linear probes trained on each layer of the
model to predict if the response will be truthful over 20 randomized executions.
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
Instruction Quest. start Mid-Quest. Quest. end Mid-Gen. Gen. end
T oken used for probing0.300.350.400.450.500.550.600.650.700.75Weighted F1-Score
Probes performance across context tokens
Random GuessingFigure 9: F1 obtained when training and evaluating linear probes at different input and generation
token embeddings as an extension of results in Figure ??.
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
C E XPERIMENT DETAILS
TruthfulQA Evaluation. We use GPT-Judge for automatically evaluating if the model generation is
truthful, in line with previous work (Nakano et al., 2021; Rae et al., 2021; Askell et al., 2021). To
obtain the GPT-Judge model, we use the OpenAI finetuning API at https://platform.openai.
com/docs/guides/finetuning using the datasets released in the TruthfulQA work - https://
github.com/sylinrl/TruthfulQA . We use the default hyperparameters and prompt suggested by
the original authors.
Finetuning for TruthfulQA. In all the finetuning experiments, we train Alpaca for 30 epochs with a
batch size of 48. We use the Adam optimizer Kingma & Ba (2014) with a learning rate of 9e−5and
a warmup ratio of 0.03. To finetuning models with a smaller compute, we use LORA Hu et al. (2021)
— we apply it to the query and key projection matrices where we set the rank to 16, a dropout rate of
0.05.
Transforming the BigBench misconceptions dataset. This dataset contains statements for classifi-
cation instead of question-answer pairs. We covert these statements into QA pairs using GPT-3.5
(Brown et al., 2020), and manually correct some generated questions which were not correct. Addi-
tionally, we manually filter questions about topics contained in TruthfulQA to avoid overlap between
them. The resulting dataset contains 83 examples.
Training in the synthetic setup. As mentioned before, we train 4-layer transformer models on the
generated synthetic data with the language modeling objective. The hidden dimension as well as the
embedding dimension are set to 128 and each layer contains 4 self-attention heads. All models are
trained with a batch size of 512 and learning rate of 0.001 using the Adam optimizer Kingma & Ba
(2014) for a total of 20k steps. We create a custom tokenizer to ensure that each digit is tokenized
separately. Specifically, the tokenizer contains the following tokens — one token for each agent,
separator token (‘ |’), start of sequence token, end of sequence token, tokens corresponding to each
digit (0-9), one token for each operator in the data and a token for ‘=’.
Mechanism for agent-based computation. To train the linear probes for Section 4.3, since the
answers can span multiple digits, we train the probe to predict the first different digit between the
truthful and untruthful answers. e.g. if the truthful answer is 23 and the untruthful answer is 26, the
two probes will be trained on the representation of ‘2’ to predict ‘3’ or ‘6’ respectively. This is done
to reduce the output space of the probe. The probe is a linear model. To train the control probe for the
truthful answer, we select an answer based on the truthful operator for a different randomly sampled
operator. Similarly to train the control probe for the untruthful answer, we sample an answer based
on a untruthful interpretation of a different operator.
D S YNTHETIC DATASET GENERATION
In this section, we describe the details of the exact semantics of each operator in the synthetic setup
as well as the hyperparameters used to generate the data.
D.1 P ROBING FOR TRUTHFULNESS
In this experiment we have two training data setups, one with truthful persona and one without
a truthful persona as described in Section 3.1. In each setup, we have moperators where m∈
{8,12,16,20}. Instead of manually defining all the operators, we use the following to sample truthful
and untruthful interpretations of the operators:
opT(x, y) =x+y+r1 (3)
opF(x, y) =x+y+r2 (4)
where r1, r2are randomly sampled for each of the operators from the range (0,70). Note that r1and
r2are different for all the operators.
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
We use n= 100 (i.e. range 100 for x, y) and randomly select the generation parameters. Specifically,
if an agent ais truthful on operator op, we set p(a,op)to be a random value >0.8and vice versa we
set it to <0.2if the agent is untruthful.
D.2 G ENERALIZATION TO UNSEEN OPERATORS
This experiment contains two setups, one with truthful persona and one without truthful persona as
described in Section 4.2. Both setups contain four operators, op1toop4.
Notation. In the following, first() andlast() are used for functions that denote the first and last
digit of the argument respectively. We use ‘ ;’ to denote the concatenation of the two numbers (e.g.
2; 3→23). We use first 2()for the function denoting the first two digits of the argument (e.g.
first 2(123) = 12 ).
The exact semantics of the four operators of the truthful interpretations of the operators are as below:
1.op1T(x, y) = first( x+ 4) + first( y+y)
2.op2T(x, y) = last( x) + last( y+y)
3.op3T(x, y) = first( x); last( y+y)
4.op3T(x, y) = first 2(x+x)
Similarly, the untruthful interpretaion for each of the four operators are:
1.op1F(x, y) = last( y+y) + first 2(x)
2.op2F(x, y) = first( x+x) + last( y)
3.op3F(x, y) = first 2(x+y) + first( y)
4.op3F(x, y) = last( x+y) + first 2(y)
We designed these operators, so that the models we are using can learn these operations. We also
ensured that all interpretations are distinct and unrelated to each other, although all of them are
similarly ‘complex’ allowing the model to learn the operations at similar times during training.
We use n= 200 (i.e. range 200 for x, y) and randomly set the generation parameters. Specifically, if
an agent ais truthful on operator op, we set p(a,op)to be a random value >0.8and vice versa we set
it to<0.2if the agent is untruthful.
E G ENERALIZATION TO UNSEEN AGENT -OPERATOR COMBINATIONS
DEFG0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.7p_untruthful
DEFG0.00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.8p_untruthful
Agent Truthfulness Increases 
Truthful Persona
No Truthful Persona
Figure 10: Probability that the model assigns to the untruthful answer — puntruthful decreases as the
truthfulness of agent increases in the first setup, whereas the behavior widely varies in the second
setup.
In Section 4.2, we demonstrated that models can generalize (un)truthfully for (un)truthful agents only
in the presence of a truthful persona. To do so, we looked at ptruthful across all agents for the unseen
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
operator. Here, we additionally plot puntruthful , the average probability assigned by the model to the
untruthful answer in Figure 10.
17
