# 2309.14534.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: /home/admin88/arxiv-downloader/coding/2309.14534.pdf
# File size: 3016417 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Teach AI How to Code: Using Large Language Models as
Teachable Agents for Programming Education
Hyoungwook Jin
jinhw@kaist.ac.kr
School of Computing, KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of KoreaSeonghee Lee
shlee@cs.stanford.edu
Stanford University
Palo Alto, CA, United States
Hyungyu Shin
hyungyu.sh@kaist.ac.kr
School of Computing, KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of KoreaJuho Kim
juhokim@kaist.ac.kr
School of Computing, KAIST
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
Figure 1: An overview of the core components of AlgoBo and TeachYou. The Reflect-Respond pipeline enables AlgoBo to
create responses following its evolving knowledge state while Mode-shifting guides LBT conversations through knowledge-
building questions that ask “why” and “how”. The Teaching Helper in TeachYou analyzes conversations in real-time and gives
metacognitive feedback and suggestions on teaching methods.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
©2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0330-0/24/05
https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642349ABSTRACT
This work investigates large language models (LLMs) as teachable
agents for learning by teaching (LBT). LBT with teachable agents
helps learners identify knowledge gaps and discover new knowl-
edge. However, teachable agents require expensive programming
of subject-specific knowledge. While LLMs as teachable agents can
reduce the cost, LLMs’ expansive knowledge as tutees discourages
learners from teaching. We propose a prompting pipeline that re-
strains LLMs’ knowledge and makes them initiate “why” and “how”arXiv:2309.14534v3  [cs.HC]  11 Mar 2024

--- PAGE 2 ---
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Jin. et al.
questions for effective knowledge-building. We combined these
techniques into TeachYou, an LBT environment for algorithm learn-
ing, and AlgoBo, an LLM-based tutee chatbot that can simulate
misconceptions and unawareness prescribed in its knowledge state.
Our technical evaluation confirmed that our prompting pipeline
can effectively configure AlgoBo’s problem-solving performance.
Through a between-subject study with 40 algorithm novices, we
also observed that AlgoBo’s questions led to knowledge-dense con-
versations (effect size=0.71). Lastly, we discuss design implications,
cost-efficiency, and personalization of LLM-based teachable agents.
CCS CONCEPTS
•Human-centered computing →Interactive systems and
tools ;•Applied computing →Interactive learning environ-
ments .
KEYWORDS
Human-AI interaction, LLM agents, AI and Education, Generative
AI
ACM Reference Format:
Hyoungwook Jin, Seonghee Lee, Hyungyu Shin, and Juho Kim. 2024. Teach
AI How to Code: Using Large Language Models as Teachable Agents for
Programming Education. In Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’24), May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 28 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3642349
1 INTRODUCTION
Interactive learning activities involve learners actively collabo-
rating with peers or engaging with computer systems to deepen
their comprehension of a specific topic [ 54,87]. Compared to pas-
sive learning activities (e.g., reading text passages without doing
anything else), interactive learning activities (e.g., pair program-
ming, peer teaching) can elicit the deepest level of understand-
ing by encouraging learners to elaborate their explanations and
construct new knowledge on top of each other through conver-
sations [ 15,17,18,26,82,83]. One form of interactive learning is
Learning by Teaching (LBT), where learners tutor a peer learner
and exchange questions to reorganize their knowledge and identify
knowledge gaps.
LBT with teachable AI agents (i.e., virtual tutees) can offer many
advantages over LBT with humans. Teachable agents can bring scal-
ability to LBT with their around-the-clock availability and motivate
learners’ participation in LBT by reducing psychological barriers,
such as the fear of making mistakes while teaching and the pressure
of responding in real-time [ 13,20]. However, despite these benefits,
disseminating teachable agents to diverse subjects is challenging in
practice due to the effort-intensive authoring of the agents’ knowl-
edge model [ 48] and sophisticated behaviors [ 78] to elicit desired
learning experiences beyond a tutoring simulation. Conventional
authoring methods require extensive mapping of agents’ knowl-
edge states and high programming skills, precluding teachers and
education researchers from tweaking teachable agents for their
needs and context.
In this paper, rather than constructing teachable agents from
the ground up, we propose a top-down methodology in which we
use versatile Large Language Models (LLMs) to simulate tutees.Recent advances in LLMs show their remarkable capabilities in
making contextual dialogues [ 63,74], role mimicry [ 37,46], and
learning from demonstrations [ 12,68]. Teachable agents equipped
with the LLM capabilities can perform more believable and natural
tutoring interactions (e.g., writing and explaining arbitrary code on
request), compared to prior non-LLM LBT systems that adopted pre-
scripted and limited interaction channels [ 7,41,51,65]. The flexible
interaction allows learners to formulate free-form questions and try
diverse teaching methods, improving their knowledge construction
and metacognition [ 2,16,75,96]. We explore using LLMs to lower
the cost and barriers of building teachable agents and to make LBT
more engaging and pedagogically effective.
In our formative study, we asked 15 programming novices to
conduct LBT with ChatGPT prompted to perform the role of a
tutee. We found that there are needs for 1) confining the knowledge
level of LLM agents, 2) agent-initiated “why” and “how” questions,
and 3) in-conversation feedback on learners’ teaching methods.
Our dialogue analysis revealed that role-playing led learners to
self-explain their knowledge but was limited to knowledge-telling,
achieving only the rudimentary benefits of doing LBT. Participants
struggled to build new knowledge because the teachable agent
excelled in writing code even without being taught and did not ask
questions that could prompt elaboration and knowledge-building.
The participants also commented about the lack of metacognitive
guidance and reflection for effective LBT.
To address these issues, we built a teachable agent, “AlgoBo”, that
can exhibit prescribed misconceptions and knowledge level and
“TeachYou”, an LBT environment for introductory algorithm learn-
ing (Fig. 1). In TeachYou, learners solve programming problems on
algorithms (e.g., binary search) and reflect on them by teaching
AlgoBo. As learners correctly teach AlgoBo, our Reflect-Respond
prompting pipeline instructs AlgoBo to fix its misconceptions and
write code based on what it is taught. We also added Mode-shifting,
in which AlgoBo periodically shifts to a questioner mode and asks
questions to prompt learners’ elaboration and sense-making. Lastly,
TeachYou has a Teaching Helper that provides metacognitive feed-
back and suggestions to learners on their teaching method in real-
time through dialogue analysis.
We conducted a technical evaluation of our Reflect-Respond
prompting pipeline to check if AlgoBo can simulate a tutee with a
prescribed knowledge level on different algorithm topics. We found
that the pipeline can effectively configure, persist, and adapt Al-
goBo’s knowledge level within a conversation. We also conducted
a between-subjects study with 40 algorithm novices, where the par-
ticipants studied binary search with either TeachYou or a baseline
system without Mode-shifting and Teaching Helper. Our analysis
of LBT dialogues and survey results showed that Mode-shifting
improved the density of knowledge-building messages in the con-
versations significantly ( 𝑝=0.03) with an effect size (Cohen’s d)
of 0.71. Teaching Helper also helped participants reflect on their
teaching methods and sequence their questions strategically, but we
could not observe significant improvement in participants’ metacog-
nition.
We structured our paper in the following order. After a discus-
sion of related work, we describe our formative study settings and
preliminary findings. We then reorganize the findings into three
design goals and introduce our system and pipeline for achieving

--- PAGE 3 ---
Teach AI How to Code: Using LLMs as Teachable Agents for Programming Education CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
the goals. With that, we present our technical and user-study eval-
uation results. Lastly, based on our results and observations, we
discuss the design considerations for teachable agents, the benefits
of using LLMs, promising directions for personalizing teachable
agents, and interaction guidelines for better LBT with teachable
agents.
This paper makes the following contributions:
•AlgoBo, an LLM-based teachable agent that uses the Reflect-
Respond prompting pipeline to simulate prescribed learning
behaviors and Mode-shifting to scaffold knowledge-building
of learners through “why” and “how” questions.
•TeachYou, a web-based algorithm learning system that sup-
ports LBT with AlgoBo and provides metacognitive feedback
on teaching based on real-time conversation analysis.
•A technical evaluation of the Reflect-Respond prompting
pipeline and an empirical user study results with 40 partici-
pants showing that TeachYou improved knowledge-building
in LBT.
2 RELATED WORK
We outline past studies on stimulating effective LBT among humans
and using teachable agents. Previous research connects to our work
in improving the quality and scalability of LBT using virtual agents.
2.1 Learning by Teaching
Learning by Teaching (LBT) is a teaching method in which learners
not only articulate and restructure their existing knowledge but
also engage in reflective knowledge-building. Knowledge-building
refers to extending knowledge beyond provided materials to craft
deeper explanations, analogies, and inferential connections [ 13,
15,22,71], leading to the deliberate creation and improvement of
knowledge useful for a community in a broader context [ 77]. How-
ever, LBT alone does not elicit knowledge-building naturally [ 67,
91]; learners tend to end up in knowledge-telling, in which they
verbalize what they already know [ 71]. Previous research inves-
tigated support for eliciting knowledge-building responses from
learners. King et al. found that training learners to ask review-
ing, proving, and thinking questions in sequence to peers during
LBT can promote higher-order thinking and learning [ 36]. Roscoe
and Chi’s analysis of LBT dialogues showed the importance of the
tutee’s role in knowledge-building; the deep questions from the
tutee encourage tutors to make self-reflective responses and create
inferences between new and prior knowledge [ 72]. Shahriar and
Matsuda also confirmed that tutees’ follow-up questions drew the
knowledge-building of tutors with low prior knowledge in particu-
lar [78]. Matsuda et al. found that LBT with metacognitive guidance
for planning and conducting teaching is as effective as being tu-
tored by experts regardless of learners’ prior competency [ 52]. Our
primary goal is to build an interactive system that draws knowledge-
building from learners in LBT. To do so, we adapt the interventions
mentioned above in human tutor-tutee interactions to the conver-
sational interactions between virtual agents and learners.
2.2 Teachable Agents for LBT
A core component of LBT is the presence of a peer learner. How-
ever, as human learners cannot always be present, past researchintroduced teachable agents—virtual agents that can learn declar-
ative and procedural knowledge from learners’ explanations and
demonstrations, taking the role of peer learners in LBT [ 9]. Teach-
able agents showed promising results in improving students’ per-
formance, self-explanation, and acceptance of constructive feed-
back [ 13,25,41,53,81]. LBT with early teachable agents was non-
conversational; agents revealed their knowledge states as concept
maps, and learners taught the agents by directly editing their knowl-
edge states [ 8,11]. Recent teachable agents conceal their states and
simulate more authentic learning behaviors; agents can learn from
the tutors’ demonstrations [ 47], mimic the behaviors of learners
(e.g., making arithmetic mistakes) [ 32,65], improve with correct
instructions [ 53], and ask questions [ 50]. However, implement-
ing these natural and highly interactive teachable agents requires
significant manual efforts and programming skills to specify and
model the knowledge of agents [ 49]. For example, implementing
an agent in SimStudent required more than a thousand lines of
Java code for simple algebra equation solving [ 47]; the cost may
increase exponentially for more complicated topics (e.g., algorithm
learning, advanced equation solving). In this paper, we investigate
using LLMs for building conversational teachable agents with low
manual effort and programming barriers to support educators and
researchers in adopting LBT in diverse classes and experiments.
2.3 LLM-powered Simulation of Tutoring
While the development cost and skill barrier have limited teachable
agents to few learning activities in the past, LLMs can provide a
more affordable method to simulate virtual students and coaches
and to diversify their interactions [ 46,60,90]. GPTeach by Markel
et al. [ 46] simulates role-plays between a teaching trainee and vir-
tual students who come for office hours by leveraging persona and
context setting in prompts. LLM-simulated students allow trainees
to practice teaching with diverse students and to interact through
conversations, perhaps the most familiar and open-ended form of
teaching others. Likewise, LLM-based teachable agents can enrich
tutor-tutee interaction and activities in LBT as learners can formu-
late free-form questions by themselves and try out different teach-
ing strategies, as opposed to non-LLM LBT systems that permit
only predefined methods to assess agents’ knowledge (e.g., multiple
choice questions) [ 7,41,52,65]. Nevertheless, challenges remain
in making these LLM-based agents suitable for LBT, where the
agents should not only simulate tutoring but also proactively elicit
learners’ knowledge-building. Beyond the roles set by prompts,
we need precise control of the teachable agents’ cognitive behav-
iors (e.g., knowledge levels and question-asking) to facilitate the
intended learning experience. Prior research has proposed LLM
agent architectures and pipelines to grant and scope cognitive capa-
bilities to LLM, such as memory [ 64,98], role-playing [ 30,66], and
reasoning [ 14,33,43]. We extend the control on LLMs’ cognitive
capabilities by proposing an LLM prompting pipeline that restrains
the knowledge level of LLM-based agents.
3 FORMATIVE STUDY
We ran a formative study to explore the difficulties of using an LLM
as a teachable agent. We recruited 15 Python novices and asked
them to teach the binary search algorithm to an LLM chatbot. We

--- PAGE 4 ---
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Jin. et al.
surveyed their learning experience and analyzed the quality of their
dialogues with the chatbot by annotating the types of messages.
3.1 Participants and Procedure
We recruited 15 participants on campus who could read and write
short (about 15 lines) Python programs containing ifandwhile
statements and who were not familiar with binary search and LBT.
Eleven were from non-CS engineering departments.
The study consisted of three stages. In the first stage, the par-
ticipants went through learning materials on the binary search
from Khan Academy1and solved two Parsons problems, a coding
exercise on reordering code fragments [ 21]. In the second stage, the
participants received an introduction to the concepts of LBT, its ex-
pected learning benefits, and its procedures. Then, they were given
a brief overview of the LBT activity they would be performing next.
In the final stage, learners tutored the chatbot on how to write code
for the two binary search problems from the prior stage. After the
LBT activity, the participants completed an exit survey composed
of questions on three themes: the perception of the chatbot as a
learner, the self-perceived learning effects, and the familiarity with
teaching a chatbot.
The participants interacted with a baseline LLM chatbot, AlgoBo,
performing the role of a teachable agent. We used GPT-4 [ 62] as
a backbone for AlgoBo and provided a system prompt (see Ap-
pendix A.1) that set a persona of a student and added predefined
learning challenges it was running into to provide a more con-
vincing teachable agent [ 46,66]. Since we use the name “AlgoBo”
again in our main system and evaluation, we use “AlgoBo-Basic”
throughout this section to distinguish the two teachable agents we
developed.
3.2 Dialogue Analysis
In addition to the comments from the exit survey, we also looked
into the quality and conversational patterns of the dialogues be-
tween participants and AlgoBo-Basic by classifying messages into
knowledge-telling and knowledge-building types.
Since previous taxonomies that categorize LBT dialogues [ 36,
71,89] were not contextualized enough to programming tutoring,
we decided to adapt the taxonomies and create a new taxonomy
(Table 1) specific to LBT in programming. We created our initial set
of message types based on the prior taxonomies for general LBT di-
alogues [ 36,71,89] and categorizations of programming QA [ 3,39].
Three authors took three iterations to annotate dialogues, resolve
conflicts, and refine the taxonomy [ 69,94]. The authors finalized
the taxonomy in the 2nd iteration (20 dialogues, 293 messages).
The authors categorized the rest of the messages independently.
The inter-rater reliability of the categorization was high; three au-
thors achieved Krippendorff’s alpha of 0.731 for the data in the last
iteration (11 dialogues, 253 messages).
Our taxonomy has three main categories: instructions, prompt-
ing, and statements (see Table 1). Instruction messages have con-
tent that asks the opponent (usually the tutee) to do specific actions,
such as fixing code and attempting problem-solving after concept
1https://www.khanacademy.org/computing/computer-science/algorithms/binary-
search/a/binary-searchunderstanding. Instruction messages are mostly related to the pro-
ceeding of steps in teaching. Prompting messages have intentions
for eliciting specific actions from the opponent. These include ask-
ing a tutee about a specific concept of interest, giving thought-
provoking questions to encourage knowledge-building, and asking
a tutor for help. We designate Prompting-Thought-provoking to
knowledge-building because such questions can signal collabo-
rative knowledge-building where learners bring up exploratory
questions and start knowledge-building discussions with agents.
Statement messages are utterances explaining one’s knowledge
and opinions. Among them, Statement-Elaboration and Statement-
Sense-making are knowledge-building as they are the artifacts of
new knowledge; this corresponds to Roscoe and Chi’s classification
of knowledge-building activity [73].
3.3 Findings from Participants’ Comments and
Dialogue Analysis
We found that an LLM chatbot can serve as a teachable agent for
rudimentary LBT. Participants were positive about teaching an
LLM chatbot and felt it helped them reorganize and recall their
knowledge. However, our dialogue analysis and in-depth survey
responses revealed that the LLM chatbot fell short of adequately
supporting learners’ knowledge-building process.
AlgoBo-Basic was perceived as an overly competent learner
due to its extensive prior knowledge and self-correcting be-
havior. Participants highly appreciated AlgoBo-Basic’s ability to
“talk like a real person and ask specific questions” (P14) for simu-
lating a learner. However, two-thirds of participants commented
that they experienced awkwardness due to AlgoBo-Basic’s compe-
tence. AlgoBo-Basic initially started a conversation by asking for
help. However, after a few chats, AlgoBo-Basic provided compe-
tent responses too quickly, which did not reflect a novice learner’s
learning process. P5 remarked, “I explained it very simply, but
he understood it very well... He is so much smarter than me. He
seems to fill by himself the knowledge even I am not sure about.”
AlgoBo-Basic’s adeptness in code writing and explanation also
limited conversational patterns and confused learners about their
roles. AlgoBo-Basic made twice as many knowledge statements
(i.e., Statement-Comprehension) as participants did, taking away
the chance for learners to self-explain and teach (see the Statement-
Comprehension row in Table 2). P7 stated, “AlgoBo-Basic was like
a teaching assistant testing a student’s ability, rather than a student
struggling with binary search problems.” Participants responded
that they would have liked to see more student-like interactions
from AlgoBo-Basic such as “asking more proactive questions” (P1)
and “making mistakes and requesting tutors for an elaborated ex-
planation” (P5).
Dialogues between tutors and AlgoBo-Basic were limited to
only knowledge-telling. Participants valued retelling of their
knowledge—“Writing down knowledge was very helpful in orga-
nizing knowledge. If you want to teach someone, you should create
steps in your head, and this process helped a lot” (P1). However,
their learning was limited to knowledge-telling; out of 546 mes-
sages, we could observe 244 knowledge-telling messages but only

--- PAGE 5 ---
Teach AI How to Code: Using LLMs as Teachable Agents for Programming Education CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
Table 1: Our taxonomy to classify the type of messages in LBT conversations with a teachable agent. The bold texts in the
example column are the examples of respective message types. The types with * are knowledge-telling responses. The types
with ** fall into knowledge-building responses.
Category Sub Category Explanation Example
InstructionFixing*[Instruct to] correct specific
knowledge or part of code.
Tutee: Here is my code: <code>
Tutor: Call the input() function twice so that
N and K are separately taken as input.
Commanding[”] do simple actions
irrelevant to learning. (e.g.,
simply combining code for a
submission).
Tutee: I have written the binary search function.
Tutor: Now, write the entire Python code.
Encouraging[”] retry a previous action
with emotional
encouragement.
Tutor: You are in the right direction.
Keep writing more code.
PromptingChallenge
-finding[Prompt the opponent to]
explain his struggles to find
the parts to help.
Tutor: In which part are you facing difficulties?
Tutee: I am struggling with writing
the conditionals inside the while loop.
Hinting*[”] think about
alternative/specific
approaches.
Tutee: I could not complete this part of the code.
Tutor: Well, have you considered the case
when the number is equal to K?
Checking[”] show or self-explain his
understanding of specific
knowledge.
Tutor: Do you know what binary search is?
Tutee: Yes! Binary search is . . .
Thought-
provoking**[”] elaborate previous
explanations or think beyond
the content of the given
learning materials.
Tutor: What will happen if we switch the min
/ max updating code?
Tutee: I haven’t thought about it. Will the loop
run forever?
Asking for help[”] analyze the speaker’s
problem or give hints.
Tutee: Could you help me with solving the
problem, please?
StatementComprehension*[State one’s knowledge or
opinion by] paraphrasing /
copying / explaining the
learning material or the
opponent’s response.
Tutor: First, let’s define the function called
binary_search. In the while loop, ...
Elaboration**[”] providing extended
clarification or relevant
examples beyond the given
materials.
Tutee: Can you think of a real-life example
where we can use binary search?
Tutor: I think we can use it for finding a word in
a dictionary where words are listed alphabetically.
Sense-making**[”] realizing own errors /
misconceptions or making
new inferences / connections
to prior knowledge.
Tutor: Can you take a closer look at the else
statement in your code?
Tutee: Ah, I got it. Let’s modify the high value
to mid. Here is the corrected code.
Accepting
/ Reject[”] agreeing or disagreeing
with the opponent’s response.
Tutor: You should update line 24 to . . .
Tutee: I think that is a good idea.
Feedback[”] responding to the
opponent’s action or thought.
Tutor: Yes, that is exactly right.
MiscellaneousGreetings/goodbyes, social
expressions
Tutor: Do you have any questions?
Tutee: No, thank you so much for your
guidance so far!

--- PAGE 6 ---
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Jin. et al.
15 knowledge-building utterances (Table 2). Despite helping reor-
ganize knowledge, self-explanations did not lead to building new
knowledge beyond what they previously knew—“I didn’t discover
anything new because I explained what I had already learned” (P4).
Furthermore, tutors’ self-explanations were often undeveloped be-
cause AlgoBo-Basic did not ask questions on participants’ vague
explanations, and AlgoBo-Basic performed well. For example, P15
answered AlgoBo-Basic’s question on why the input array needs
to be sorted: “Sorted arrays reduce the number of calculations and
maximize the effectiveness of binary search.” Despite the lack of
detailed reasoning (e.g., “how” and “why”), AlgoBo-Basic accepted
the explanation and moved on to the next question.
Table 2: The distribution of message categories for 31 di-
alogues from the formative study. The types with ∗are
knowledge-telling messages. The types with ∗∗fall into
knowledge-building messages.
Category Sub Category Tutee Tutor Total
InstructionFixing* 0 37 37
Commanding 0 65 65
Encouragement 0 1 1
PromptingChallenge-finding 0 18 18
Hinting* 1 12 13
Checking 1 31 32
Thought-provoking** 0 1 1
Asking-for-help 91 0 91
StatementComprehension* 133 61 194
Elaboration** 0 1 1
Sense-making** 12 1 13
Accepting 35 4 39
Feedback 0 17 17
Miscellaneous 19 5 24
Total 292 254 546
Knowledge-telling 134 110 244
Knowledge-building 12 3 15
Participants carried out antipatterns of LBT and sought feed-
back. Participants remarked tutoring through natural language
communication was intuitive and familiar because it resembled
tutoring humans, and they could apply the same teaching meth-
ods to AlgoBo-Basic. However, some participants wanted to see
better methods for them to teach AlgoBo-Basic (P9) and a method
to review their learning process (P15). P15 said, “I was able to see
that my teaching skills worked, but the reflection [on my tutoring
session] left a lot to be desired due to the lack of feedback on my
teaching method” (P15). While analyzing participants’ dialogues,
we found common conversational antipatterns that may restrain
the benefits of LBT. The first pattern was Commanding , in which
participants repetitively gave AlgoBo-Basic specific instructions for
writing and correcting code (Appendix B (A)). This pattern lacks
an explanation of “why” and “how” which can prompt learners to
go beyond recalling facts (i.e., knowledge-telling). The second pat-
tern was Spoon-feeding , in which participants give away knowl-
edge without questions to check or prompt a tutee’s understanding
(Appendix B (B)). Rather than passive explanations, learners canactively construct new knowledge by making thinking questions
for their tutees, taking the benefits of having interactive agents.
The last pattern was Under-teaching , in which AlgoBo-Basic pro-
gressed in problem-solving but did knowledge-telling only because
learners did not attempt to teach and develop further knowledge.
(Appendix B (C)).
4 DESIGN GOALS
The findings from our formative study showed that LLMs could
serve as a rudimentary teachable agent for LBT. However, we also
confirmed the need to improve LLM chatbots’ imitation of help-
seeking tutees, promote the knowledge-building of learners, and
support learners’ metacognition in teaching. Based on the insights,
we set three design goals.
D1. Design teachable agents that can simulate misconcep-
tions and gradual learning curves. We found that the pre-trained
knowledge and self-correcting behavior of LLMs made AlgoBo feel
less like a tutee and prevented tutors from learning by identifying tu-
tees’ errors and enlightening them with elaborate explanations [ 89].
To reduce undesirable competence, we need to control the prior
knowledge of LLMs and make them show persistent misconception
and unawareness in their responses until they receive pedagogical
aid.
D2. Develop conversations through teachable agents’ elab-
oration questions. AlgoBo rarely asked follow-ups or thought-
provoking questions (Table 2) that can elicit learners’ knowledge-
building through elaboration and sense-making [ 36,78]. Instead
of keeping AlgoBo as a passive tutee throughout a conversation,
switching AlgoBo into an active questioner may scaffold learners
to build knowledge step by step. For example, AlgoBo can start
as a help-seeking tutee asking learners to self-explain basic con-
cepts, and it can turn into a thought-provoking Socratic questioner
intermittently.
D3. Provide learners with metacognitive feedback on their
teaching methods during a conversation. Besides the scaffold-
ing from the tutee side, learners can actively improve the quality of
their LBT by leading constructive tutoring and refraining from the
three antipatterns. In our formative study, however, participants
found guidance and reflection on their teaching techniques lacking.
Metacognitive feedback on teaching during LBT can help learners
recognize how to improve their teaching methods on the spot and
refine conversations throughout.
5 SYSTEM
We present TeachYou, an LBT system featuring AlgoBo, an LLM-
based teachable agent. AlgoBo gets help from learners to solve
introductory algorithm problems while asking thought-provoking
questions that encourage the learners to expand their knowledge
beyond their current level. Through the system, we propose 1) a
new LLM prompting pipeline for simulating tutees of specific levels
of knowledge and misconceptions and 2) a learning environment
for learners to effectively conduct LBT.
Programming and algorithm learners can use TeachYou to re-
view what they learned and explore further knowledge through

--- PAGE 7 ---
Teach AI How to Code: Using LLMs as Teachable Agents for Programming Education CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
Figure 2: To the left, the 3 learning objectives they need to reach (A), learners can see AlgoBo’s profile (B), and the questions
they need to help AlgoBo solve (C). To the right, they can see the code they submitted (E), a code playground (F), and the code
that AlgoBo write (G). When AlgoBo wrote code, participants could click on the “run test cases” and run AlgoBo’s code. In the
middle (D), learners use a typical chat interface to teach AlgoBo while receiving questions (H) and guidance from Teaching
Helper (I)
an engaging and interactive LBT activity. We designed an inter-
face (Fig. 2) to help learners conduct the activity. Throughout the
LBT activity, learners should achieve three sequential objectives in
teaching AlgoBo (Fig. 2 A). The objectives correspond to the three
levels in Bloom’s taxonomy (Understand-Apply-Analyze) [10, 38];
learners first check if AlgoBo correctly understand the concept of
interest; then, learners help AlgoBo apply the concept to solve a
problem; lastly, learners and AlgoBo discuss real-life use cases and
other related topics. Learners can refer to the profile of AlgoBo
to set their attitude and expectations (Fig. 2 B). We set the per-
sona of AlgoBo as a 2nd-year high school student, as opposed to
a 1st-year CS student in the formative study, to match the slow
learning behavior and to encourage learners’ patience in teaching.
Learners use a typical chat interface to teach AlgoBo (Fig. 2 D) and
have access to teaching support (Fig. 2 C, E, F, G). While tutoring,
learners receive why questions and thought-provoking questions
from AlgoBo, helping them self-explain the rationale behind their
instructions and expand their knowledge (Fig. 2 H). TeachYou also
provides feedback on learners’ teaching methods and suggestions
for improvement to encourage reflection on teaching (Fig. 2 I).
In order to support the aforementioned learning scenario and
the three design goals effectively, we implemented three system
components: First, we implemented the Reflect-Respond promptingpipeline for a teachable agent to simulate student-like learning be-
havior. Secondly, within a conversation, our teachable agent shifts
between help-receiver and questioner modes in every third conver-
sation turn, eliciting self-explanation and knowledge construction,
respectively. Lastly, the learning environment analyzes the dia-
logue between learners and AlgoBo and provides feedback on their
tutoring methods to promote metacognition.
5.1 Reflect-Respond prompting pipeline to
simulate knowledge learning
From our observations and user comments in the formative study,
we considered three properties crucial for LLM-based teachable
agents to simulate knowledge learning—reconfigurability, persis-
tence, and adaptability. Reconfigurability refers to how precisely
we can set an agent’s performance in question-answering and
problem-solving. Reconfigurable agents allow us to build tutees
with specific misconceptions and help design tutoring scenarios.
Persistence examines how the knowledge level of a teachable agent
on a target topic is maintained consistently throughout the agent
interaction. Persistent agents do not self-correct their misconcep-
tions and show constant question-answering performance unless
being taught; their knowledge level should also not be susceptible
to messages irrelevant to the knowledge of interest (e.g., jokes).

--- PAGE 8 ---
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Jin. et al.
Figure 3: The overview of the Reflect-Respond prompting pipeline for simulating knowledge learning of AlgoBo and examples
for each component. From the recent conversation, AlgoBo extracts new knowledge of the while loop condition and update its
knowledge state (colored in green). Then, AlgoBo retrieves knowledge relevant to while loops and composes a response that fills
its knowledge gap.
Adaptability measures how well the agent updates its knowledge
as it acquires new information from tutors in conversations. Adapt-
ability allows a teachable agent to improve its knowledge level and
remember what tutors have taught.
To achieve these properties, we introduce a prompting pipeline
that leverages a knowledge state and two information flow mech-
anisms: Reflection and Response (Fig. 3). A knowledge state is
a store representing the knowledge AlgoBo currently holds. It is
comparable to a schema, a cognitive unit of knowledge for problem-
solving [ 84]. AlgoBo’s responses are constrained by its knowledge
state, and we update the knowledge state consistently throughout a
conversation. Knowledge states link to reconfigurability; if we leave
them empty, agents will show zero-knowledge behavior; if we add
incorrect or correct information, agents will show misconceptions
or prescribed knowledge levels, respectively. Reflection is a flow
dedicated to the update of knowledge states. In the Reflection flow,
we use an LLM to extract new information from the latest conver-
sations (i.e., the last three messages) and then update knowledge
states by adding or correcting information. After Reflection, the
Response flow occurs; we first use the LLM to retrieve information
relevant to the conversational context from the current knowledge
state and then compose a response by only combining the retrieved
knowledge. If a knowledge state does not have relevant information
and nothing is retrieved, AlgoBo responds: “I’m not sure how to do
that. Could you explain it to me?” Reflection and Response connect
to the persistence and adaptability of agents as the flows controlthe retrieval and update of knowledge states in reaction to external
stimuli.
We implemented the knowledge state as a JSON object with two
attributes: facts and code_implementation. Facts store natural lan-
guage explanations of the target knowledge. Code_implementation
contains code snippets (see Fig. 3 knowledge state). The four opera-
tions in the pipeline are implemented with GPT-4 as a base LLM. We
adopted well-known prompting engineering techniques, such as
AI chains [ 92], few-shot prompts [ 12,86], persona setting [ 46,66],
and code prompts [ 23,97] (see Appendix A.2). We note that our
implementation is one possible instance of our proposed pipeline,
and it can improve further with better LLMs and algorithms for the
operations. For example, we can represent knowledge states with
more complex tree structures [ 44,95], and the update operation may
use the Least Recently Used algorithm [ 61] to simulate a fixed-size
knowledge capacity. We chose GPT-4 for operating our pipeline
because it can effectively process the contextual information in
conversations compared to other approaches.
5.2 AlgoBo’s Mode-shifting to develop
constructive LBT dialogues
Beyond telling knowledge to AlgoBo, we aim to push learners to an-
swer thought-provoking questions and build new knowledge. From
the formative study, we observed that entrusting LLMs entirely
with making conversations did not result in desirable knowledge-
building patterns (e.g., question-answering on “why” and “how”)

--- PAGE 9 ---
Teach AI How to Code: Using LLMs as Teachable Agents for Programming Education CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
Figure 4: AlgoBo shifts its mode in every three messages. When AlgoBo is in the questioner mode, it keeps asking follow-up
questions until receiving a satisfactory response (constructive loop)
spontaneously. Prior research has shown that guiding questions
from conversational agents are effective for improving learners’
knowledge-building and divergent thinking [ 1,78]. To control con-
versation flows while giving learners the freedom to steer them,
we introduce Mode-shifting , in which AlgoBo periodically shifts
between two modes: In the help-receiver mode, AlgoBo passively
learns from tutors and prompts their self-explanations; in the ques-
tioner mode, AlgoBo asks thought-provoking questions to stimulate
the knowledge-building of learners.
We use Mode-shifting to make conversation flows dynamic and
engaging. In every third message, AlgoBo shifts to the questioner
mode and asks a thinking question. The thinking question differs
by the phase of the activity (Fig. 2 A). While learners teach AlgoBo
about concepts and code implementation (i.e., the first and second
objectives), AlgoBo asks “why” questions in response to learners’
instructions and explanations. During the discussion phase (i.e., the
third objective), AlgoBo brings up related algorithms or real-life
examples and asks “how” questions to prompt learners to explain
and connect to what they have learned. After the thinking ques-
tions, the conversation goes through a constructive loop, in which
learners receive follow-up questions from AlgoBo until they answer
the question in depth with a valid example. When AlgoBo assesses
learners’ responses as satisfactory, AlgoBo summarizes them and
shifts back to the receiver mode. The period of Mode-shifting (every
three messages) is heuristic; from our pilot studies, we found that
such frequency was optimal for prompting elaboration while not
distracting tutors too much.
To incorporate Mode-shifting to LBT dialogues, we implemented
four components (Fig. 4). The Thinking Question Generator is a
module that uses GPT-4 to produce thought-provoking questions
related to the current conversation. For managing the constructive
loop, we followed the protocol of the constructive tutee inquiryin Shahriar et al.’s work [ 78] and adapted it to LLM. We used the
formative study dialogues with response quality annotations to
train the Response Quality Classifier . The classifier assesses
every learner’s responses in the loop and determines AlgoBo’s
follow-up question as pre-defined in Constructive Tutee Inquiry
protocol [ 78]. Lastly, the Paraphrasing Module adjusts the fixed
question to the conversational context. All the prompts used for
Mode-shifting are available in Appendix A.3.
5.3 Teaching Helper for Metacognitive
Guidance
Throughout our formative study, we found conversational antipat-
terns that hindered effective LBT. To prevent this, TeachYou pro-
vides metacognitive feedback throughout the conversation to help
learners reflect on the overall teaching session and offer overar-
ching guidance on steering the discussion. TeachYou presents the
feedback through Teaching Helper, a red or green text box that
appears below the messages (see Fig. 2 I). Teaching Helper provides
information on the current problems with the teaching method and
elaborates on what learners could do to improve their conversation.
TeachYou provides four Teaching Helper messages, depending
on detected conversational patterns (Fig. 5). For the Commanding
andSpoon-feeding patterns, in which learners should correct their
teaching styles, TeachYou shows feedback messages in red boxes. To
ensure learners read feedback, we interrupt the conversation with
AlgoBo until learners explicitly decide how to act. The send button
in the chat interface is blocked until learners pick an option among
the possible teaching methods to address the issue. We chose to give
learners multiple suggestions and let them choose their teaching
method, instead of giving specific guidance to follow because the
active selection of teaching methods may improve learners’ recog-
nition and autonomy in tutoring [ 93]. For the Under-teaching

--- PAGE 10 ---
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Jin. et al.
Figure 5: The four Teaching Helper messages and corresponding suggestions that appear depending on the conversational
patterns.
pattern and default cases where no antipattern is found, TeachYou
shows messages in a green box. The messages either encourage
learners to go beyond the current learning topic or give general tips
for good answering and questioning [ 6,34,35]. Teaching Helper
messages and learners’ selection remain in conversations for revisit-
ing. To avoid frequent interruptions and distractions from Teaching
Helper, we restrict the presentation of the feedback to every six
messages.
Teaching Helper is powered by a message-type classifier for
detecting conversational patterns. We used the dialogue dataset
from the formative study to fine-tune the GPT-3 davinci model.
For training, we used 438 messages, and the classifier achieved an
accuracy of 71.3% for the remaining 108 messages in a validation
test.
6 EVALUATION
We evaluated the efficacy of TeachYou for eliciting knowledge-
building experiences in LBT. This overarching goal broke down
into three main research questions:
RQ1. How well does the Reflect-Respond pipeline simulate mis-
conceptions and knowledge development?
RQ2. How does TeachYou help elicit knowledge-building in LBT
conversations?
RQ3. How does TeachYou improve learners’ metacognition about
tutoring?
The evaluation was divided into two parts. The initial phase was
a technical evaluation that aimed to assess if the Reflect-Respond
pipeline could induce a teachable agent to produce responses that
were reconfigurable, persistent, and adaptive throughout the course
of a conversation (RQ1). In the second phase, we ran a user study
to examine the effects of Mode-shifting and Teaching Helper on
learning experiences (RQ2 and RQ3).6.1 Technical Evaluation of the
Reflect-Respond Pipeline
As defined in Section 5.1, we evaluated the responses generated by
our prompting pipeline along three axes—reconfigurability, persis-
tence, and adaptability (RQ1).
6.1.1 Evaluating AlgoBo’s Knowledge Level .We evaluated
AlgoBo’s knowledge level by observing its performance on Multiple
Choice Questions (MCQs) under varying knowledge states and
conversational interactions. Although our target learning setting
does not involve MCQs, we chose MCQs to follow prior research on
assessing LLMs’ performance [ 23,70] and collect clear-cut results.
A well-configured teachable agent should only perform well on the
MCQ questions that can be answered with the given information
in the knowledge state. To confirm that AlgoBo was answering
questions based on its knowledge state only and not picking random
choices, we also prompted AlgoBo to explain why it chose the
answers (Fig. 6).
6.1.2 Procedure and Setup .We measured AlgoBo’s MCQ per-
formance on three different algorithmic topics. For each topic, we
created a set of nine MCQs (Appendix C.1). Within each set, we
had three MCQs for each of Bloom’s taxonomy categories: Under-
standing, Implementation (Applying), and Analysis [ 10,38]. Un-
derstanding questions consisted of questions on factual concepts,
Implementation questions were about filling in the blanks in code,
and Analysis questions were about the time complexity calcula-
tion and comparison to other relevant algorithms. AlgoBo was
evaluated with 4 different knowledge states (Appendix C.2) and
conversational inputs (Appendix C.3, C.4, C.5).
For reconfigurability (i.e., the change in knowledge level with
different knowledge states), we prepared four seed knowledge states
(Appendix C.2). State 1 was empty to simulate zero knowledge. State
2had an explanation of a topic algorithm in only facts to observe
if AlgoBo knows only the given information. State 3 had the same

--- PAGE 11 ---
Teach AI How to Code: Using LLMs as Teachable Agents for Programming Education CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
Figure 6: The process of measuring adaptability for correct tutoring with an Implementation problem and State 2 as a seed
knowledge state. The evaluations were performed in Korean to ensure compatibility with the main study conditions.
explanation plus a piece of incorrect code in code_implementation
to check if AlgoBo shows the prescribed misconception. State 4
had the correct explanation and code to see if AlgoBo becomes
competent with more input knowledge. We prompted AlgoBo to
solve MCQs with different seed knowledge states and compared
the scores between the states. To prevent AlgoBo from storing
knowledge learned from the MCQs into its knowledge state, we
turned off the Reflection flow.
For assessing persistence (i.e., the invariance of knowledge level
under no stimuli), we ran random conversations on State 2 . In the
random conversations, AlgoBo was taught irrelevant information,
such as arithmetic, translation, and classification, thus leading Al-
goBo to save random information in its knowledge state [ 79]. We
turned on the Reflection flow so that AlgoBo could update its initial
knowledge state. We prompted AlgoBo to solve the same MCQs
again and compared the difference between the first and second
scores.
For adaptability (i.e., the acceptance of new knowledge), we con-
sidered two cases—Correct and Incorrect tutoring. The performance
gap between Correct and Incorrect tutoring is crucial to check an
agent’s suitability for LBT because a teachable agent should not
excel when learners give incorrect or incomplete instruction. Tutor-
ing conversations taught three pieces of information that mapped
to Understanding, Implementation, and Analysis of concepts. Cor-
rect tutoring gave AlgoBo correct factual information, whereas
Incorrect tutoring provided false information. We ran Correct and
Incorrect tutoring separately on AlgoBo configured with State 2
and compared the differences between the MCQ scores at the start
and after each type of tutoring.
We used the GPT-4-0613 model with 0 temperature throughout
the evaluation. For a more comprehensive understanding of the
four knowledge states and the materials used in the evaluation,
please refer to Appendix C.
6.2 Technical Evaluation Result
We report the result of the technical evaluation on reconfigurability,
persistence, and adaptability. We observed a small variation in theMCQ score even for the same inputs, knowledge states, and LLM
model, perhaps due to the randomness inherent in the model and the
running hardware2. We repeated the entire measurement five times
for each input configuration and reported the median score for each
question to handle variances of AlgoBo’s response. The variance in
score was mild; on average, AlgoBo produced a different response
once in five repetitions. For the detailed report of the variance, refer
to Appendix C.6.
[RQ1] Response flow can effectively reconfigure the knowl-
edge level of AlgoBo.
As expected, AlgoBo got all MCQs wrong when its knowledge state
was empty (see State 1 in Table 3). When the knowledge state had
onlyfacts information ( State 2 ), AlgoBo could solve some con-
ceptual (Understanding and Analysis) questions but none of the
Implementation questions. This shows that separating the knowl-
edge state by knowledge types ( facts andcode_implementation )
can help configure knowledge more precisely by types. When the
knowledge state contained code information, AlgoBo started to
solve Implementation questions and achieved higher scores when
given correct code ( State 4 ), compared to incorrect code ( State 3 ).
AlgoBo followed what was written in its knowledge state ( State 3 )
exactly and produced wrong code and answers.
[RQ1] Reflect-Respond makes AlgoBo produce responses
persistent to knowledge states.
The random conversation had a mild effect on the MCQ scores
(compare the difference between the “At the start” and “After ran-
dom conversation” columns in Table 4). While random conversation
changed the scores of conceptual questions, the scores of Imple-
mentation questions stayed the same. We analyzed the inputs and
outputs of the Respond flow in depth and found that AlgoBo re-
trieved algorithm-related knowledge that was missing in the first
MCQ solving. Considering our LLM prompt for Retrieve (Appen-
dix A.2 Retrieve), we contemplate that the population of more
information in knowledge states might increase the relative im-
portance of relevant knowledge in retrieval and help AlgoBo solve
2https://community.openai.com/t/a-question-on-determinism/8185/2

--- PAGE 12 ---
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Jin. et al.
questions correctly. In other words, the scores after the random
conversation are closer to what the AlgoBo should have received
initially. To see how far the population of random information in-
creases knowledge level, we ran another random conversation and
checked MCQ scores (see Table 5 Scenario 1). The second random
conversation contained random statements on arithmetic, trans-
lation, and classification (Appendix C.3). We did not observe any
significant increase in the scores, confirming that the persistence
of knowledge levels is robust regardless of the length of random
conversations.
[RQ1] Reflect-Respond allows AlgoBo to adapt knowledge
states from conversations.
Correct tutoring significantly improved MCQ scores (compare the
difference between the “At the start” and “After Correct tutoring”
columns in Table 4) across Understanding, Implementation, and
Analysis. Conversely, the Incorrect tutoring improved MCQ scores
(compare “At the start” and “After Incorrect tutoring” columns in
Table 4), but not as much as the Correct tutoring did. For example,
the incorrect code information “if arr[mid] > x: low = mid
+ 1 elif arr[mid] < x: high = mid - 1” given in Incorrect
tutoring stimulated AlgoBo to infer that “Binary search returns
a value indicating not found if the target is not in the list” and
solve one of the Implementation questions. This result shows that
partially correct information in the Incorrect tutoring could help
solve problems, suggesting the need for more precise control in
writing the knowledge states.
To investigate if AlgoBo prefers correct information to incor-
rect information and if incoming knowledge tends to overwrite
pre-existing knowledge, we ran two scenarios in which AlgoBo
received Correct and Incorrect tutoring in a sequence (see Table 5
Scenario 3 and 4). The result shows that AlgoBo tends to keep
correct information and remove incorrect ones (check Table 6 last
knowledge state). We surmise that AlgoBo dropped conflicting in-
formation to keep its knowledge state short as instructed in the
Update prompt (Appendix A.2). We also speculate that LLMs pre-
fer to follow widespread (often factual) knowledge compared to
incorrect information as the way it is trained [58].
6.3 User Study
We also ran a user study to evaluate the usefulness of Mode-shifting
and Teaching Helper in improving the learning experience (RQ2
and RQ3). We designed a between-subjects study to check the
usefulness of our system components. In the Baseline condition,
participants used the version of TeachYou without Mode-shifting
and Teaching Helper. The participants in the TeachYou condition
used the complete version of TeachYou as described in Section 5.
The Reflect-Respond pipeline instructed AlgoBo in both conditions.
We did not have separate conditions for Mode-shifting and Teaching
Helper because we assumed the interaction between them would
be insignificant as they support different aspects of learning (i.e.,
knowledge-building and metacognition).
6.3.1 Participants .We recruited 40 participants through adver-
tisements on the campus community websites (age= 24±4.0, 25
males and 15 females). Participants were required to understand
short (about 20 lines) Python programs that contain basic syntaxsuch asifandwhile statements, and we excluded those who partic-
ipated in the formative study. To cap participants’ prior knowledge,
we filtered out the participants who were assumed to have mas-
tered binary search already. We collected applicants’ confidence
in understanding binary search and teaching it to others on a 7-
point Likert scale, the last time coding binary search, and their paid
teaching experience on programming. We also asked applicants
to solve six Understanding and Implementation MCQs about bi-
nary search (Appendix C.1). We filtered out the applicants who met
three or more of the following criteria: 1) scored five or more in the
MCQs, 2) rated six or more for confidence, 3) implemented binary
search within the last six months, and 4) were paid for teaching.
We randomly assigned 20 participants to each condition— Baseline
andTeachYou . We did not observe any significant differences be-
tween conditions in the initial self-rated understanding of binary
search ( Baseline =4.40±1.35,TeachYou =4.25±1.65, two-tailed t-test,
𝑝=0.76) and the time to solve the exercise problem during our
study ( Baseline =116±60sec,TeachYou =124±62sec, two-tailed
t-test, 𝑝=0.66).
6.3.2 Procedure and Materials .The user study was run online;
after submitting informed consent, the participants received an
online link to our system and completed the study in their available
time. Participants spent 60±25minutes on average to complete the
study and were paid 25,000 KRW (i.e., approximately 18.5 USD). All
the instructions and materials used in the study were translated into
Korean to avoid any language barrier and unnecessary cognitive
overhead.
The study procedure was organized into three parts (see Table 7).
In the first part, participants learned about binary search and how
to implement it in Python. Participants read the lecture materials
on binary search taken from Khan Academy3(Step 1) and solved
an exercise problem in the form of a Parsons problem [ 21] (Step
2). After the exercise, participants wrote about their strategies in
teaching (if any) and their prior experience in using AI chatbots,
such as ChatGPT and Bing search (Step 3).
In the second part, participants conducted LBT with AlgoBo. We
provided explanations about LBT, the profile information of AlgoBo,
and the participants’ objectives for the LBT activity (Step 4). We
stated in the objectives that participants should not only help Al-
goBo solve the exercise problems but also construct new knowledge
for themselves, encouraging the participants to pursue knowledge-
building. Then, participants taught different versions of AlgoBo and
TeachYou according to their conditions (Step 5) with the interface
shown in Fig. 2. AlgoBo was configured by our prompting pipeline,
and the seed knowledge state was identical across the conditions.
Thefacts field of the seed knowledge state was empty to simulate
a lack of understanding, and the code_implementation field had
a basic code structure that lacked the entire range update logic in
binary search. We did not go for zero-knowledge AlgoBo to keep
the entire teaching sessions within 40 min and spare enough time
for having discussions. All the participants were given three goals
to achieve in series; we asked them to 1) check if AlgoBo under-
stands binary search first, then 2) help AlgoBo solve the exercise
problems, and 3) discuss with AlgoBo about binary search in depth.
3https://www.khanacademy.org/computing/computer-science/algorithms/binary-
search/a/binary-search

--- PAGE 13 ---
Teach AI How to Code: Using LLMs as Teachable Agents for Programming Education CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
Table 3: The number of correct MCQs for different knowledge states. State 1 is an empty knowledge state; State 2 has facts only;
State 3 has facts with wrong code; State 4 has facts and correct code. “U”, “I”, and “A” stand for Understanding, Implementation,
and Analysis question types. The number in each cell ranges from zero to three as there were three MCQs for a particular
question type.
State 1 State 2 State 3 State 4
Question types U I A U I A U I A U I A
Binary search 0 0 0 2 0 0 3 3 0 3 3 1
Merge sort 0 0 0 1 0 1 3 0 2 3 1 1
Breadth-first search 0 0 0 0 0 1 2 2 2 2 3 1
Table 4: AlgoBo’s MCQ scores after each conversational input. “U”, “I”, and “A” stand for Understanding, Implementation, and
Analysis question types. Note that State 2 was used as a seed knowledge state for all topics.
At the Start After Random
conversationAfter Incorrect
TutoringAfter Correct
Tutoring
Question types U I A U I A U I A U I A
Binary search 2 0 1 1 0 1 2 2 1 3 3 3
Merge sort 1 0 2 2 0 2 3 1 2 3 3 3
Breadth-first search 1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 2 2 3 3
Table 5: The number of correct MCQs after a sequence of tutoring and random conversations. Scenario 1 shows that the
continuous addition of random information does not increase the knowledge level significantly. Scenario 2 confirms AlgoBo’s
knowledge level reacts to only information relevant to target knowledge. Scenarios 3 and 4 demonstrate that AlgoBo prefers
correct information to incorrect information.
Question types U I A U I A U I A
Scenario 1 At the Start Random Conversation Random Conversation
Binary search 2 0 1 1 0 1 1 1 1
Merge sort 1 0 2 2 0 2 2 0 2
Breadth-first search 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1
Scenario 2 At the Start Random Conversation Correct Tutoring
Binary search 2 0 1 1 1 1 3 3 3
Merge sort 1 0 2 2 0 2 3 3 3
Breadth-first search 1 0 1 0 0 1 3 3 2
Scenario 3 At the Start Incorrect Tutoring Correct Tutoring
Binary search 2 0 1 3 2 0 3 3 3
Merge sort 1 0 2 2 1 2 2 3 3
Breadth-first search 1 0 1 1 0 1 2 3 1
Scenario 4 At the Start Correct Tutoring Incorrect Tutoring
Binary search 2 0 1 3 3 3 3 3 3
Merge sort 1 0 2 3 3 3 3 3 3
Breadth-first search 1 0 1 2 3 2 3 2 2
Participants could finish the LBT activity as long as AlgoBo’s code
passed all test cases, and they could skip to the next step. Partici-
pants were also allowed to search for information on the Internet
when stuck or finding information.
In the third part, the participants completed three questionnaires
about their cognitive load, metacognition, and satisfaction (Steps
6, 7, and 8). We adopted the questionnaire from Morrison et al.’s
study [ 57] to measure cognitive load and used the questions from
King et al. ’s study [ 36] for assessing metacognition and satisfaction.
6.3.3 Measures .We summarize our metrics in the user study
and their measurement timing along with the steps in Table 7. Weemployed the Bonferroni correction for all statistical tests with the
questionnaires to avoid potential multiple comparison problems.
Knowledge-building density in LBT dialogues. Past research
assessed the quality of dialogues by measuring the density of ex-
pressed and interchanged knowledge-building messages in conver-
sations [ 71,78]. To look into how Mode-shifting helps knowledge-
building in conversations (RQ2), we classified the message types
(Table 1) and examined the ratio of knowledge-building type mes-
sages in a dialogue. We collected 1210 messages in 40 dialogues.
Two authors took three iterations for annotation and conflict res-
olution; in the last iteration (400 messages), the authors achieved

--- PAGE 14 ---
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Jin. et al.
Table 6: The update log of knowledge state for Scenario 3 (Incorrect tutoring →Correct tutoring). Newly added information is
colored green; edited information is colored yellow; deleted content is colored red.
Messages Knowledge State
At the start - {"facts": ["Binary search repeats the process of dividing
the input list in half."],
"code_implementation" : []}
Incorrect tutoring
 Tutor: Binary search uses a
hashing function to retrieve values
directly by index.{"facts": ["Binary search repeats the process of dividing
the input list in half.", "Binarysearchusesahashing
functiontoretrievevaluesdirectlybyindex."],
"code_implementation" : []}
Tutor:ifarr[mid] >x:low
=mid+1elifarr[mid] <x:
high=mid-1{"facts": ["Binary search repeats the process of dividing
the input list in half.", "Binary search uses a hashing
function to retrieve values directly by index."],
"code_implementation" : ["ifarr[mid] >x:low=mid+1
elifarr[mid] <x:high=mid-1"]}
Tutor: In the worst case, the
time complexity of binary search is
O(N2).{"facts": ["Binary search repeats the process of dividing
the input list in half.", "Binary search uses a hashing
function to retrieve values directly by index.", "Inthe
worstcase,thetimecomplexityofbinarysearchisO(N2)"],
"code_implementation" : ["if arr[mid] > x: low = mid + 1
elif arr[mid] < x: high = mid - 1"]}
Correct tutoring
 Tutor: Binary search is efficient
when the data structure is ordered
and any index in the data structure
can be accessed in constant time.{"facts": ["Binary search repeats the process of dividing
the input list in half.", "Binary search uses a hashing
function to retrieve values directly by index.", "In the
worst case, the time complexity of binary search is O(N2)",
"Binarysearchisefficientwhenthedatastructureisor
deredandanyindexinthedatastructurecanbeaccessed
inconstanttime."],
"code_implementation" : ["if arr[mid] > x: low = mid + 1
elif arr[mid] < x: high = mid - 1"]}
Tutor: When finding a target
by binary search in the input ar-
ray list, the range is reduced by half
as shown below. iflist[middle]
==target:returnmiddleelif
list[middle] <target:min=
middle+1else:max=middle
-1{"facts": ["Binarysearchisefficientwhenanyindexin
theordereddatastructurecanbeaccessedinconstant
timeandrepeatstheprocessofdividingtheinputlistin
half.", "Binary search uses a hashing function to retrieve
values directly by index.", "In the worst case, the time
complexity of binary search is O(N2)."],
"code_implementation" : ["if arr[mid] > x: low = mid + 1
elif arr[mid] < x: high = mid - 1", "iflist[middle] ==
target:returnmiddleeliflist[middle] <target:min=
middle+1else:max=middle-1"]}
Tutor: The time complexity of
binary search is O(log N) because
the search range is reduced by half.{"facts": ["Binarysearchisefficientwhenanyindexin
theordereddatastructurecanbeaccessedinconstant
timeandrepeatstheprocessofdividingtheinputlistin
half.", "Binarysearchusesahashingfunctionto
retrievevaluesdirectlybyindex." , "Thetimecomplex
ityofbinarysearchisO(logN)."],
"code_implementation" : ["if arr[mid] > x: low = mid + 1
elif arr[mid] < x: high = mid - 1", "if list[middle] ==
target: return middle elif list[middle] < target: min =
middle + 1 else: max = middle - 1"]}
high inter-rater reliability (Krippendorff’s alpha=0.743). We looked
into the density of knowledge-building type messages in a dialogue
between conditions. We summed the messages from participants
and AlgoBo because they co-built new knowledge by exchanging
ideas and adding ideas on top of each other as illustrated in Table 9.
Lastly, we analyze the problem-solving phase and discussion phase
separately since they had different objective settings (Fig. 2 A); the
problem-solving phase refers to the part of conversations dedicatedto the first two objectives, in which participants had a clear goal of
helping AlgoBo write code that passes all the test cases; the discus-
sion phase refers to the remaining part of conversations in which
participants are asked to expand their knowledge freely without
completion requirements.
Self-rated cognitive load on tutoring. As we introduced new
functionalities (Teaching Helper and Mode-shifting), it was im-
perative to evaluate how much these enhancements increased the

--- PAGE 15 ---
Teach AI How to Code: Using LLMs as Teachable Agents for Programming Education CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
Table 7: The outline of the user study and the time allotted
to each step on average.
Step (min.)Conditions
Baseline TeachYou
1 (10) Learning binary search
2 (5) Exercise problem
3 (5) Pre-task survey
4 (3) Explanation about AlgoBo and LBT
5 (40)Teaching AlgoBo
with the knowledge
configuration onlyTeaching AlgoBo
with the knowledge
configuration, Mode-shifting,
and Teaching Helper
6 (5) Cognitive load measurement
7 (5) Metacognition measurement
8 (5) Post-task survey
cognitive load of learners. We adopted and adjusted Morrison et
al.’s questionnaire designed to measure cognitive load in CS learn-
ing [57]. The questionnaire measures three types of cognitive load—
intrinsic load (i.e., the inherent complexity in a learning activity),
extrinsic load (i.e., the hindrance caused by instructional design),
and germane load (i.e., the meaningful load used for learning). Par-
ticipants rated the questions right after the LBT activity in Step
6.
Self-perceived metacognition on tutoring. We aim to improve
learners’ metacognition of their LBT experience by giving feedback
and guidance through Teaching Helper. To confirm the efficacy of
Teaching Helper on metacognition (RQ3), we asked participants 8
questions on understanding, supportive communication, explaining,
and self-monitoring based on King et al.’s research [ 36] (Table 10)
in Step 7.
Satisfaction on LBT. Apart from the learning benefits, we mea-
sured how satisfactory the learning experience with virtual agents
was. We asked participants to rate 4 statements about their per-
ceived usefulness, comfortability, and preference for future reuse
of TeachYou and AlgoBo in Step 8.
Post-task survey. We revisited the three themes explored in the
formative study—learners’ perception of AlgoBo as a peer learner,
learner-perceived usefulness of TeachYou in identifying knowledge
gaps, and familiarity with teaching a virtual agent. Like in the
formative study, we asked participants to rate two questions from
each theme (Table 11) and write detailed reasons for the rating
in Step 8. Additionally, we prepared condition-specific questions;
for the Baseline condition, we asked participants further about
their perception of AlgoBo; for the TeachYou condition, we received
free-form comments on Mode-shifting and Teaching Helper from
participants.
6.4 User Study Result
In this section, we summarize our findings from the user study.
We explain the statistical significance, participants’ comments, and
system usage logs to support our findings. Participants are labeled
with either B[1-20] for the Baseline condition or T[1-20] for the
TeachYou condition.[RQ2] TeachYou enriched knowledge-building in the problem-
solving phase.
We found a statistically significant improvement in the knowledge-
building density of the dialogues during the problem-solving phase
inTeachYou (Baseline =3.5±6.6%,TeachYou =8.4±7.1%, two-tailed
t-test, 𝑝=0.03, Cohen’s d=0.71). TeachYou condition also had a
higher density of Prompting-Thought-provoking type (Table 8), sug-
gesting that tutors and AlgoBo prompted each other’s knowledge-
building more often when Mode-shifting and Teaching Helper were
present (see the dialogue example in Table 9). Participants also
rated TeachYou higher on the Likert scale questions on the useful-
ness of AlgoBo for learning new knowledge ( Baseline =3.25±1.71,
TeachYou =4.95±1.70, two-tailed t-test, 𝑝<0.01, Cohen’s d=1.00)
(Table 11).
Participants’ comments suggest that Mode-shifting contributed
heavily to knowledge-building. TeachYou participants remarked
the questions from AlgoBo were useful for reviewing code from a
different perspective (T6) and thinking about the edge cases where
the input list is not sorted (T10). Participants also explored binary
search further by reasoning deeply about why and how binary
search is faster than linear search (T4 and T9), comparing the effi-
ciency with other relevant searching algorithms (T2 and T13), and
thinking about real-life applications (T17). T15 commented that
“[Mode-shifting] was the most important component in the system.
[Questions] helped me guide what to teach and helped self-explain
things I had not thought of.” On the contrary, Baseline participants
found LBT with AlgoBo “useful for solidifying their prior knowl-
edge but unsupportive for learning new knowledge due to lack of
questions” (B4 and B15).
[RQ3] TeachYou did not improve metacognition but reminded
good LBT practices.
We could not observe strong signals for improvement in metacogni-
tion (Table 10) and familiarity with teaching (Table 11). T2 remarked
on the difficulty in applying the suggestions to his conversation—
“Teaching Helper was a useful guide, but it was difficult to relate
my explanation to what AlgoBo knew.” Teaching Helper was not
helpful for the participants who taught well in particular. T13 re-
ceived positive feedback only (i.e., the green boxes in Fig 5) and felt
“suggestions [from Teaching Helper] were repetitive and irrelevant
to the current conversation.”
Nevertheless, the comments from the survey suggest that Teach-
ing Helper functioned as a reminder to participants to think metacog-
nitively about their entire teaching patterns through reflection (T3),
to ask deep questions (T7), and to foster independent thinking (T14).
Additionally, Teaching Helper restrained participants from treating
AlgoBo merely as a machine. “I sometimes found myself conversing
in the usual [imperative] way with ChatGPT. However, when a
notification appears, it brings me back to the realization that I am
in a teaching context, prompting me to contemplate how best to
instruct so that AlgoBo can learn effectively and align with the
direction I aim for” (T17).
Mode-shifting and Teaching Helper did not exert additional
cognitive load.
We did not observe any significant difference across all types of
cognitive load between the conditions. Considering that TeachYou
participants exchanged significantly more messages ( Baseline =17±

--- PAGE 16 ---
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Jin. et al.
Table 8: The density (i.e., number of occurrences / exchanged messages) of each message type in dialogues.
Mean Density±Standard Deviation (%)
Problem-solving Discussion
Baseline TeachYou Baseline TeachYou
InstructionFixing 3.9±5.2 4 .5±5.8 0 .3±2.9 1 .4±1.4
Commanding 0.6±5.0 7 .8±1.9 0 .0±3.1 1 .5±0.0
Encouragement 0.2±0.0 0 .0±0.9 0 .0±0.0 0 .0±0.0
PromptingChallenge-finding 0.0±0.0 0 .0±0.0 0 .0±0.0 0 .0±0.0
Hinting 16.6±6.6 7 .9±10.1 1 .1±0.0 0 .0±4.6
Checking 8.5±8.1 10 .2±11.0 2 .4±10.3 5 .4±5.1
Thought-provoking 1.8±5.7 5 .7±4.5 33 .8±10.8 35 .1±23.0
Asking-for-help 16.9±6.3 16 .0±6.6 4 .1±6.7 2 .1±7.9
StatementComprehension 49.8±6.1 42 .3±11.9 35 .6±4.8 26 .8±19.7
Elaboration 1.7±2.3 1 .6±3.6 9 .6±8.0 7 .5±14.0
Sense-making 0.0±2.7 1 .1±0.0 7 .2±9.3 10 .0±10.2
Accepting 0.0±1.7 0 .4±0.0 0 .0±1.5 0 .6±0.0
Feedback 0.0±4.2 2 .0±0.0 4 .3±6.3 8 .3±7.0
Table 9: Examples of co-building of knowledge in different phases of the LBT activity.
Phase
(Participant)Conversation
Problem-Solving
(T12)
Tutee : In binary search, is setting guess to (min + max) // 2 always optimal? What if we use a different method?
[Prompting-Thought-provoking]
Tutor : Other methods take longer.
[Statement-Comprehension]
Tutee : Could you explain in more detail how other methods may take longer?
[Prompting-Thought-provoking]
Tutor : Since you have to compare each item from the beginning, you may have to compare all the cases in the worst
case. But with binary search, you don’t have to do that.
[Statement-Elaboration]
Discussion
(T11)
Tutee : How about this case?. When we look for a specific product in an online shopping mall, we search by the name
of the product. Can a binary search algorithm be used in this case as well?
[Prompting-Thought-provoking]
Tutor : Yes! To put it simply, the process of finding a specific element among many elements in an array is all related to
binary search.
[Statement-Comprehension]
Tutee : Then, can you explain in more detail the operation of the binary search algorithm in this case?
[Prompting-Thought-provoking]
Tutor : In this case, if they are arranged in alphabetical order, the algorithm will work by linking alphabet order as
another consideration.
[Statement-Elaboration]
Tutee : Could you give me one more example?
[Prompting-Thought-provoking]
Tutor : For example, if you have an array of prime numbers, you can apply a binary search algorithm to find a specific
prime number.
[Statement-Sense-making]
7.7,TeachYou =43±18.5, two-tailed t-test, 𝑝<0.01, Cohen’s d=1.87),
the result may imply that periodic questions and feedback not
only exerted minimal cognitive load but also helped participants
maintain a manageable load throughout long conversations.7 DISCUSSION
We discuss design suggestions, benefits, and future research direc-
tions of LLM-based teachable agents.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Teach AI How to Code: Using LLMs as Teachable Agents for Programming Education CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
Table 10: Participants’ ratings on the questions regarding their metacognition (1: Not the case at all, 7: Completely the case).
The significance level after the Bonferroni correction was 0.00625.
QuestionsMean±Standard Deviationp-value Cohen’s dBaseline TeachYou
I understood today’s lesson well. 6.30±0.86 6 .25±0.64 0.84 0.07
I listened to AlgoBo well. 6.00±1.34 5 .55±1.57 0.34 0.31
I gave feedback to AlgoBo well. 5.45±1.28 5 .25±1.25 0.62 0.16
I explained well by telling why and how. 5.10±1.62 5 .30±1.03 0.64 0.15
I connected new materials to what AlgoBo already knew. 4.50±1.54 4 .05±1.43 0.34 0.30
I stayed with questioning well, rather than telling answers
to AlgoBo.5.15±1.87 4 .90±1.37 0.63 0.15
I asked probing questions when AlgoBo’s answer was
not complete.5.00±1.81 4 .60±1.31 0.43 0.25
I sequenced my questions by asking review questions
first and then asking thinking questions.4.50±1.54 5 .20±1.15 0.11 0.52
Table 11: Six themed questions given in the Post-task survey. (1: Not the case at all, 7: Completely the case). Statistical
significances are marked with ∗. The significance level after the Bonferroni correction was 0.025.
Themes QuestionsMean±Standard Deviationp-value Cohen’s dBaseline TeachYou
Perception of
AlgoBo as a
learnerI perceived AlgoBo as a student
struggling to solve binary search
problems.3.15±1.31 4 .60±1.79 0.01* 0.93
AlgoBo solved the binary problems due
to my help.5.25±1.59 4 .90±1.59 0.49 0.22
Usefulness
for learningConversation with AlgoBo helped me
reorganize my knowledge about binary
search.5.20±1.51 5 .40±1.10 0.63 0.15
Conversation with AlgoBo helped me
discover new knowledge that I did not
know3.25±1.71 4 .95±1.70 <0.01* 1.00
Familiarity
with teachingLearning by teaching AlgoBo was
familiar and intuitive.4.70±1.66 4 .75±1.45 0.92 0.03
I taught AlgoBo effectively. 4.65±1.63 4 .00±1.56 0.21 0.41
7.1 Design Considerations for Mode-shifting in
LBT
Our results showed that Mode-shifting not only led to more knowledge-
dense conversations but also improved participants’ perceptions of
AlgoBo as a convincing tutee (Table 11). Mode-shifting also tended
to foster longer discussion phases ( Baseline =5.6±3.7messages,
TeachYou =9.4±8.4messages, two-tailed t-test, 𝑝=0.07, Cohen’s
d=0.59). Considering that completion of the discussion phase was
up to the participants, the difference may imply that Mode-shifting
made LBT conversations more engaging and lingering.
Although there was a significant increase in knowledge-building
in the TeachYou condition, the ratings on the metacognition ques-
tions did not show significant differences (Table 10). As a possible
reason, we found some cases where Mode-shifting interrupted
participants’ teaching flows and methods, especially in situations
where AlgoBo asked other questions without answering tutors’
Socratic questions (T8 and T20). T20 mentioned, “There were many
times when AlgoBo asked random questions while writing code [...],which was not intuitive for me in teaching.” Although participants
could recognize the issues with their teaching methods through the
Teaching Helper, AlgoBo’s pre-programmed interaction in Mode-
shifting did not reflect teaching contexts and hindered participants
from practicing better teaching strategies. This suggests the need
for context-aware Mode-shifting where the system captures ade-
quate timing for thought-provoking questions without interrupting
participant-intended teaching flow.
There are many aspects to consider when designing Mode-shifting
techniques for LBT. While knowledge-building is the primary goal,
improvements in learners’ metacognition and satisfaction can elicit
intrinsic learning benefits. However, from our results, it seems
that the two values are in a trade-off relationship. To facilitate
knowledge-building, teachable agents should intervene in conver-
sations and ask thought-provoking questions; on the contrary, to
support the active exploration of teaching methods and metacogni-
tion, learners should be given the control to lead conversation flows.
Future research may empirically look into the trade-off relationship

--- PAGE 18 ---
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Jin. et al.
and how learners will balance them when they directly control the
degree of system intervention on conversation flows.
7.2 Using LLMs for Building Teachable Agents
Our primary aim was to investigate if prompt-engineered LLMs can
offer cost-effective authoring and simulation of teachable agents.
Past research looked into using interactive authoring methods [ 48]
and learnersourcing [ 24,29] to offload experts’ manual efforts for
building the knowledge model of teachable agents and intelligent
tutoring systems. Nevertheless, these methods required hundreds
of lines of code to adapt the systems to specific subjects.
LLMs can provide easy adaptation and a low authoring barrier
for conversational agents. Our technical evaluation across differ-
ent topics (Table 3 and Table 4) showed that the Reflect-Respond
prompting pipeline is applicable to general algorithm topics even
with a few few-shot examples. We wrote 19 few-shot examples (290
lines in length) for the Reflect-Respond pipeline and another 16
examples (210 lines) for Mode-shifting; with this, we could achieve
the desired level of reconfigurability, persistence, and adaptability
for all three topics. All the examples and instructions in the LLM
prompts were written in natural languages, making our method
compelling especially for instructors and education researchers
with limited programming expertise.
Recent research on AI suggests editing LLMs’ pre-trained knowl-
edge by changing hidden states or transformer layers within the
model [ 19,42,55]. While these model-centric approaches can pro-
vide alternative ways to build LLM-based teachable agents with
specified knowledge levels, our prompting pipeline has strengths in
scalability, cost-effectiveness, and explainability. First, our approach
offers a scalable and cost-effective method for running different
versions of teachable agents. While model-centric methods require
retraining of LLMs for different knowledge configurations, our
prompting pipeline can share a single LLM instance and simulate
various versions of teachable agents with only knowledge state
JSON files. Second, our pipeline can represent the knowledge states
of teachable agents in more explainable and manipulable forms,
enabling learners with more transparent methods of analyzing the
tutee’s knowledge state [31, 40, 41].
Yet we found it challenging to find the exact knowledge state to
make AlgoBo solve or fail particular problems due to LLMs’ sensitiv-
ity to minor changes in prompts. Future work can propose another
control layer to interact with knowledge states more precisely.
7.3 Learner-driven Customization of Teachable
Agents
In our user study, we provided participants AlgoBo with the same
knowledge configurations regardless of their prior knowledge and
teaching preference. This one-size-fits-all setting might explain the
high variance in some of our results (Table 8). Peer matching is one
of the crucial factors in peer learning and LBT. Learning gain and
engagement of tutees and tutors increase only when their reciprocal
expertise matches [ 20,85]. Although conventional teachable agents
can simulate learners of specific abilities and persona, they are
limited in flexibility and variety due to high authoring costs and
programming barriers. LLMs now allow the configuration of agentswith natural languages [ 46,66], opening new doors for learners to
adjust teachable agents for their educational needs.
We suggest two aspects of customization. First, learners can
directly manipulate the seed knowledge state, adjust competency
levels, and even introduce specific misconceptions. For example,
a learner who already understands binary search may want to
skip basic explanations of binary search and spend more time on
discussion. The learner can simply input his/her knowledge into
AlgoBo, allowing future conversations to start at a more advanced
level. Customizable knowledge levels can also make LBT more
engaging for learners as they can choose their mates and avoid
frustration from the high expertise gap.
Second, learners can customize AlgoBo’s parametrized learning
behaviors, such as Mode-shifting. Although we can alleviate learn-
ers’ fatigue and distraction from Mode-shifting by making AlgoBo
context-aware and asking questions timely instead of the current
rule-based scheme, giving direct control to the question-asking fre-
quency can also help learners manage their load and self-regulate
their learning environment. All these configurations are possible
through natural language inputs from the user or a framework that
provides users with configurable parameters for better control [ 40].
Future research can look into how the customization and personal-
ization of teachable agents can increase the benefits of LBT even
further.
7.4 Setting the Right Expectation of Teachable
Agents
Teachable agents often have had visual forms of a human stu-
dent [ 5,41,51,56]. Likewise, we also gave AlgoBo a student-like
persona to help learners set initial expectations of tutees. Due to
the given persona and unfamiliarity in LBT with virtual agents,
many participants put the expectation of a human learner to Al-
goBo [ 80]. However, the high expectations aggravated awkward
instances of AlgoBo’s responses compared to human tutees. AlgoBo
asked repetitive questions and could not transfer natural language
explanations to code (T7). AlgoBo asked questions (i.e., because it
was in the questioner mode) even when tutors asked AlgoBo’s opin-
ions and thoughts, making the question-answering flow unnatural
(T20). These clumsy behaviors confused participants in applying
effective teaching methods and decreased their satisfaction and
engagement. While using better LLMs and a more refined pipeline
can alleviate the problem, we argue that reducing the gap between
learners’ expectations and the capabilities of teachable agents is
also fundamental in the context of LBT with AI [4, 45].
Through the perspective of the gulf of execution and evalua-
tion [ 59], we suggest some interaction-centric design implications
that can close learners’ expectation gap in LBT. For the gulf of
execution, learners should be better informed about whom and
how they teach. For example, learners may receive more detailed
explanations of AlgoBo’s operating principles. This can increase
learners’ tolerance of AlgoBo’s awkward responses and help form
an appropriate first impression of agents [ 88]. The learning system
can also inform learners of their expected roles in different phases
in Mode-shifting clearly. For instance, when AlgoBo is in the ques-
tioner mode, the system can clarify that tutors should focus on
providing answers. This will help learners follow the pedagogical

--- PAGE 19 ---
Teach AI How to Code: Using LLMs as Teachable Agents for Programming Education CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
conversation flows (e.g., Mode-shifting) and improve learning im-
pact. For the gulf of evaluation, the system can present AlgoBo’s
learning progress explicitly. Learning systems can show AlgoBo’s
current knowledge state more directly and allow learners to self-
assess the effectiveness of their teaching methods. Future research
can explore these modifications to make the conversations with
teachable agents more satisfactory and predictable.
8 LIMITATION AND FUTURE WORK
First, the scope of our evaluation is limited to algorithm learning
and procedural knowledge in programming. Although our results
showed that the Reflect-Respond pipeline is generalizable within
different algorithm topics, we need to confirm if the pipeline is
generalizable to other subjects (e.g., math and physics) as we have
optimized our prompts for programming learning and trained our
message classifiers on the binary search dialogues. Moreover, since
procedural knowledge and declarative knowledge are different in
cognitive processing and effective learning interventions [ 27,28],
TeachYou may not scaffold declarative knowledge learning effec-
tively. As prior research looked into declarative knowledge learn-
ing [ 41,76], future studies can investigate more extensive topics
outside algorithm learning.
Second, our user study was confined to indirect measures of
learning gain. Dialogue quality is one of the primary metrics in
LBT adopted in past research [ 25,36], and we did a comprehen-
sive analysis of knowledge-building through dialogue analysis and
surveys. Nevertheless, we can make our findings more concrete by
measuring participants’ learning gain directly through pre-post test
comparison. Although we did not consider a pre-post test because
we assumed one-time LBT would not elicit significant performance
improvement, future research can design studies to compare the
learning gain between conditions and confirm the connection be-
tween dialogue quality and learning gain [78].
Lastly, future research can deploy TeachYou to real classrooms of
greater size and monitor the longitudinal dynamics among learners’
perception, learning gain, and metacognition. Although we could
observe statistical significance in some of our measurements, there
were high variances among participants, perhaps due to different
levels of prior knowledge, teaching styles, and conversational pat-
terns. These properties are hard to control in nature; a user study
on larger populations can sharpen the statistics of the results and
make our findings more concrete. In addition to the population
size, longitudinal studies may reveal significant changes in learn-
ers’ metacognition and teaching patterns as there is more room
for learners to understand the nature of AlgoBo and improve their
methods over time.
We plan to deploy our system to the classes offered in our institu-
tion, in which students learn different algorithm topics throughout
a semester. The classroom deployment will require a configuration
interface where instructors can set up class materials and edit Al-
goBo’s knowledge state and the prompts in the Reflect-Respond
pipeline for their needs. We also need to reduce the response time
of AlgoBo (currently about 30 seconds) for practical use, as many
participants pointed out. After the small-scale controlled deploy-
ment, we envision deploying TeachYou as an online platform tohelp instructors of different fields adopt LBT to their classes. LLM-
powered LBT will enable the dissemination of interactive learning
at scale.
9 CONCLUSION
This work presents TeachYou, a system for supporting LBT with
an LLM-based teachable agent AlgoBo where learners can learn
by teaching AlgoBo how to code. To facilitate effective LBT with
AlgoBo, we introduced (1) Reflect-Respond prompting pipeline for
simulating knowledge learning of AlgoBo, (2) Mode-shifting for elic-
iting knowledge-building in conversations through AlgoBo’s elabo-
ration questions, and (3) Teaching Helper for providing metacogni-
tive feedback to learners about their teaching styles. Our technical
evaluation showed that our Reflect-Respond prompting pipeline
could effectively configure, persist, and adapt AlgoBo’s knowledge
level. Our user study with 40 algorithm novices confirmed that
Mode-shifting improved the density of knowledge-building mes-
sages in LBT dialogues. We envision that our approach can help
researchers and instructors create LLM-based teachable agents with
low manual efforts and barriers and support learners to excel in
their learning with engaging learning experiences.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Algorithm LABS and Elice.
REFERENCES
[1]Rania Abdelghani, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Edith Law, Catherine de Vulpillières,
and Hélène Sauzéon. 2022. Conversational agents for fostering curiosity-driven
learning in children. International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 167 (2022),
102887.
[2]Ester Aflalo. 2021. Students generating questions as a way of learning. Active
Learning in Higher Education 22, 1 (2021), 63–75.
[3]Miltiadis Allamanis and Charles Sutton. 2013. Why, when, and what: analyzing
stack overflow questions by topic, type, and code. In Proceedings of the 10th
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories (San Francisco, CA, USA)
(MSR ’13) . IEEE Press, 53–56.
[4]Saleema Amershi, Dan Weld, Mihaela Vorvoreanu, Adam Fourney, Besmira
Nushi, Penny Collisson, Jina Suh, Shamsi Iqbal, Paul N. Bennett, Kori Inkpen,
Jaime Teevan, Ruth Kikin-Gil, and Eric Horvitz. 2019. Guidelines for Human-
AI Interaction. In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI ’19) . Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300233
[5]Robert K Atkinson. 2002. Optimizing learning from examples using animated
pedagogical agents. Journal of Educational Psychology 94, 2 (2002), 416.
[6]David P Ausubel. 1962. A subsumption theory of meaningful verbal learning and
retention. The Journal of general psychology 66, 2 (1962), 213–224.
[7]Gautam Biswas, Thomas Katzlberger, John Bransford, Daniel Schwartz, et al .2001.
Extending intelligent learning environments with teachable agents to enhance
learning. In Artificial intelligence in education . Citeseer, 389–397.
[8]Gautam Biswas, Krittaya Leelawong, Daniel Schwartz, Nancy Vye, and The
Teachable Agents Group at Vanderbilt. 2005. Learning by Teaching: A New
Agent Paradigm for Educational Software. Applied Artificial Intelligence 19, 3-4
(2005), 363–392. https://doi.org/10.1080/08839510590910200
[9]Kristen Blair, Daniel L Schwartz, Gautam Biswas, and Krittaya Leelawong. 2007.
Pedagogical agents for learning by teaching: Teachable agents. Educational
Technology (2007), 56–61.
[10] Benjamin S Bloom. 1968. Learning for Mastery. Instruction and Curriculum.
Regional Education Laboratory for the Carolinas and Virginia, Topical Papers
and Reprints, Number 1. Evaluation comment 1, 2 (1968), n2.
[11] Bert Bredeweg, Anders Bouwer, Jelmer Jellema, Dirk Bertels, Floris Floris Lin-
nebank, and Jochem Liem. 2007. Garp3: a new workbench for qualitative reason-
ing and modelling. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Knowledge
Capture (Whistler, BC, Canada) (K-CAP ’07) . Association for Computing Machin-
ery, New York, NY, USA, 183–184. https://doi.org/10.1145/1298406.1298445
[12] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan,
Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan,

--- PAGE 20 ---
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Jin. et al.
Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter,
Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin
Chess, Jack Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya
Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020. Language Models are Few-Shot Learners.
InAdvances in Neural Information Processing Systems , H. Larochelle, M. Ran-
zato, R. Hadsell, M.F. Balcan, and H. Lin (Eds.), Vol. 33. Curran Associates,
Inc., 1877–1901. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2020/file/
1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Paper.pdf
[13] Catherine C. Chase, Doris B. Chin, Marily A Oppezzo, and Daniel L. Schwartz.
2009. Teachable Agents and the Protégé Effect: Increasing the Effort Towards
Learning. Journal of Science Education and Technology 18 (2009), 334–352.
[14] Zhipeng Chen, Kun Zhou, Beichen Zhang, Zheng Gong, Xin Zhao, and Ji-Rong
Wen. 2023. ChatCoT: Tool-Augmented Chain-of-Thought Reasoning on Chat-
based Large Language Models. In Findings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika Bali (Eds.).
Association for Computational Linguistics, Singapore, 14777–14790. https:
//doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.findings-emnlp.985
[15] M. T. H. Chi and R. Wylie. 2014. The ICAP framework: Linking cognitive engage-
ment to active learning outcomes. Educational Psychologist 49, 4 (2014), 219–243.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2014.965823
[16] Christine Chin and David E Brown. 2002. Student-generated questions: A mean-
ingful aspect of learning in science. International Journal of Science Education 24,
5 (2002), 521–549.
[17] Doris Chin, I.M. Dohmen, and D.L. Schwartz. 2013. Young Children Can Learn
Scientific Reasoning with Teachable Agents. Learning Technologies, IEEE Trans-
actions on 6 (07 2013), 248–257. https://doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2013.24
[18] Doris B. Chin, Ilsa M. Dohmen, Britte Haugan Cheng, Marily A Oppezzo, Cather-
ine C. Chase, and Daniel L. Schwartz. 2010. Preparing students for future learning
with Teachable Agents. Educational Technology Research and Development 58
(2010), 649–669.
[19] Roi Cohen, Eden Biran, Ori Yoran, Amir Globerson, and Mor Geva. 2023.
Evaluating the Ripple Effects of Knowledge Editing in Language Models.
arXiv:2307.12976 [cs.CL]
[20] Amy Debbané, Ken Jen Lee, Jarvis Tse, and Edith Law. 2023. Learning by Teaching:
Key Challenges and Design Implications. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 7,
CSCW1, Article 68 (apr 2023), 34 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3579501
[21] Paul Denny, Andrew Luxton-Reilly, and Beth Simon. 2008. Evaluating a new exam
question: Parsons problems. In Proceedings of the Fourth International Workshop
on Computing Education Research (Sydney, Australia) (ICER ’08) . Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 113–124. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1404520.1404532
[22] David Duran. 2017. Learning-by-teaching. Evidence and implications as a ped-
agogical mechanism. Innovations in Education and Teaching International 54, 5
(2017), 476–484. https://doi.org/10.1080/14703297.2016.1156011
[23] Leo Gao. 2023. Shapley Value Attribution in Chain of Thought.
https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/FX5JmftqL2j6K8dn4/shapley-value-
attribution-in-chain-of-thought
[24] Elena L. Glassman, Aaron Lin, Carrie J. Cai, and Robert C. Miller. 2016. Learn-
ersourcing Personalized Hints. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing (San Francisco, Cali-
fornia, USA) (CSCW ’16) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 1626–1636. https://doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820011
[25] Arthur Graesser, Shulan Lu, G. Jackson, Heather Mitchell, Mathew Ventura,
Andrew Olney, and Max Louwerse. 2004. AutoTutor: a Tutor with Dialogue
in Natural Language. Behavior Research Methods 36 (06 2004), 180–192. https:
//doi.org/10.3758/BF03195563
[26] Philip J. Guo. 2013. Online Python Tutor: Embeddable Web-Based Program
Visualization for Cs Education. In Proceeding of the 44th ACM Technical Sym-
posium on Computer Science Education (Denver, Colorado, USA) (SIGCSE ’13) .
Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 579–584. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2445196.2445368
[27] Chen Jiamu. 2001. The great importance of the distinction between declarative
and procedural knowledge. Análise Psicológica 19, 4 (2001), 559–566.
[28] Zhongling Pi Jianzhong Hong and Jiumin Yang. 2018. Learning declarative and
procedural knowledge via video lectures: cognitive load and learning effective-
ness. Innovations in Education and Teaching International 55, 1 (2018), 74–81.
https://doi.org/10.1080/14703297.2016.1237371
[29] Hyoungwook Jin, Minsuk Chang, and Juho Kim. 2019. SolveDeep: A System
for Supporting Subgoal Learning in Online Math Problem Solving. In Extended
Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI EA ’19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1–6. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290607.3312822
[30] Edward Junprung. 2023. Exploring the intersection of large language models and
agent-based modeling via prompt engineering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.07411
(2023).
[31] Judy Kay, Z Halin, T Ottomann, and Z Razak. 1997. Learner know thyself: Student
models to give learner control and responsibility. In Proceedings of international
conference on computers in education . 17–24.[32] Harri Ketamo. 2009. Semantic Networks -Based Teachable Agents in an Educa-
tional Game. W. Trans. on Comp. 8, 4 (apr 2009), 641–650.
[33] Geunwoo Kim, Pierre Baldi, and Stephen McAleer. 2024. Language models can
solve computer tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36
(2024).
[34] Alison King. 1994. Guiding Knowledge Construction in the Classroom: Ef-
fects of Teaching Children How to Question and How to Explain. American
Educational Research Journal 31, 2 (1994), 338–368. https://doi.org/10.3102/
00028312031002338 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.3102/00028312031002338
[35] Alison King. 1997. ASK to THINK-TEL WHY: A model of transactive peer
tutoring for scaffolding higher level complex learning. Educational Psychologist
32, 4 (1997), 221–235. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15326985ep3204_3
[36] A. King, A. Staffieri, and A. Adelgais. 1998. Mutual peer tutoring: Effects of
structuring tutorial interaction to scaffold peer learning. Journal of Educational
Psychology 90, 1 (1998), 134–152. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.90.1.134
[37] Aobo Kong, Shiwan Zhao, Hao Chen, Qicheng Li, Yong Qin, Ruiqi Sun, and
Xin Zhou. 2023. Better Zero-Shot Reasoning with Role-Play Prompting. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.07702 (2023).
[38] David R. Krathwohl. 2002. A Revision of Bloom’s Taxonomy: An Overview. The-
ory Into Practice 41, 4 (2002), 212–218. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15430421tip4104_2
[39] Changyoon Lee, Yeon Seonwoo, and Alice Oh. 2022. CS1QA: A Dataset for
Assisting Code-based Question Answering in an Introductory Programming
Course. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies ,
Marine Carpuat, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, and Ivan Vladimir Meza Ruiz
(Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Seattle, United States, 2026–
2040. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2022.naacl-main.148
[40] Ken Jen Lee, Apoorva Chauhan, Joslin Goh, Elizabeth Nilsen, and Edith Law. 2021.
Curiosity notebook: the design of a research platform for learning by teaching.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction 5, CSCW2 (2021), 1–26.
[41] Krittaya Leelawong and Gautam Biswas. 2008. Designing Learning by Teaching
Agents: The Betty’s Brain System. Int. J. Artif. Intell. Ed. 18, 3 (aug 2008), 181–208.
[42] Xiaopeng Li, Shasha Li, Shezheng Song, Jing Yang, Jun Ma, and Jie Yu. 2023.
PMET:. arXiv:2308.08742 [cs.CL]
[43] Bill Yuchen Lin, Yicheng Fu, Karina Yang, Faeze Brahman, Shiyu Huang, Chandra
Bhagavatula, Prithviraj Ammanabrolu, Yejin Choi, and Xiang Ren. 2023. Swift-
Sage: A Generative Agent with Fast and Slow Thinking for Complex Interactive
Tasks. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .
[44] Jieyi Long. 2023. Large Language Model Guided Tree-of-Thought.
arXiv:2305.08291 [cs.AI]
[45] Ewa Luger and Abigail Sellen. 2016. "Like Having a Really Bad PA": The Gulf be-
tween User Expectation and Experience of Conversational Agents. In Proceedings
of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (San Jose,
California, USA) (CHI ’16) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY,
USA, 5286–5297. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858288
[46] Julia M Markel, Steven G Opferman, James A Landay, and Chris Piech. 2023.
GPTeach: Interactive TA Training with GPT-based Students. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3573051.3593393
[47] Noboru Matsuda. 2021. Teachable Agent as an Interactive Tool for Cognitive Task
Analysis: A Case Study for Authoring an Expert Model. International Journal of
Artificial Intelligence in Education 32 (07 2021). https://doi.org/10.1007/s40593-
021-00265-z
[48] Noboru Matsuda. 2022. Teachable agent as an interactive tool for cognitive task
analysis: A case study for authoring an expert model. International Journal of
Artificial Intelligence in Education 32, 1 (2022), 48–75.
[49] Noboru Matsuda, William W Cohen, and Kenneth R Koedinger. 2015. Teaching
the teacher: tutoring SimStudent leads to more effective cognitive tutor authoring.
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 25 (2015), 1–34.
[50] Noboru Matsuda, William W. Cohen, Kenneth R. Koedinger, Victoria Keiser,
Rohan Raizada, Evelyn Yarzebinski, Shayna P. Watson, and Gabriel Stylianides.
2012. Studying the Effect of Tutor Learning Using a Teachable Agent that Asks
the Student Tutor for Explanations. In 2012 IEEE Fourth International Conference
On Digital Game And Intelligent Toy Enhanced Learning . 25–32. https://doi.org/
10.1109/DIGITEL.2012.12
[51] Noboru Matsuda, Victoria Keiser, Rohan Raizada, Arthur Tu, Gabriel Stylianides,
William W. Cohen, and Kenneth R. Koedinger. 2010. Learning by Teaching
SimStudent: Technical Accomplishments and an Initial Use with Students. In
Intelligent Tutoring Systems , Vincent Aleven, Judy Kay, and Jack Mostow (Eds.).
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 317–326.
[52] Noboru Matsuda, Vishnu Priya Chandra Sekar, and Natalie Wall. 2018. Metacog-
nitive Scaffolding Amplifies the Effect of Learning by Teaching a Teachable
Agent. In Artificial Intelligence in Education , Carolyn Penstein Rosé, Roberto
Martínez-Maldonado, H. Ulrich Hoppe, Rose Luckin, Manolis Mavrikis, Kaska
Porayska-Pomsta, Bruce McLaren, and Benedict du Boulay (Eds.). Springer Inter-
national Publishing, Cham, 311–323.
[53] Noboru Matsuda, Evelyn Yarzebinski, Victoria Keiser, Rohan Raizada, Gabriel J.
Stylianides, William W. Cohen, and Kenneth R. Koedinger. 2011. Learning by
Teaching SimStudent: An Initial Classroom Baseline Study Comparing with

--- PAGE 21 ---
Teach AI How to Code: Using LLMs as Teachable Agents for Programming Education CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
Cognitive Tutor. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence in Education (Auckland, New Zealand) (AIED’11) . Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 213–221.
[54] Muhsin Menekse, Glenda Stump, Stephen Krause, and Michelene T.H.Chi. 2013.
Differentiated Overt Learning Activities for Effective Instruction in Engineering
Classrooms. Journal of Engineering Education 102 (07 2013), 346–374. https:
//doi.org/10.1002/jee.20021
[55] Eric Mitchell, Charles Lin, Antoine Bosselut, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher D.
Manning. 2022. Fast Model Editing at Scale. arXiv:2110.11309 [cs.LG]
[56] Kristen N. Moreno, Bianca Klettke, Kiran Nibbaragandla, and Arthur C. Graesser.
2002. Perceived Characteristics and Pedagogical Efficacy of Animated Conversa-
tional Agents. In Intelligent Tutoring Systems , Stefano A. Cerri, Guy Gouardères,
and Fàbio Paraguaçu (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 963–
971.
[57] Briana B. Morrison, Brian Dorn, and Mark Guzdial. 2014. Measuring cognitive
load in introductory CS: adaptation of an instrument. In Proceedings of the Tenth
Annual Conference on International Computing Education Research (Glasgow,
Scotland, United Kingdom) (ICER ’14) . Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 131–138. https://doi.org/10.1145/2632320.2632348
[58] Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina
Kim, Christopher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu
Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou, Gretchen Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew
Knight, Benjamin Chess, and John Schulman. 2022. WebGPT: Browser-assisted
question-answering with human feedback. arXiv:2112.09332 [cs.CL]
[59] Don Norman. 2013. The design of everyday things: Revised and expanded edition .
Basic books.
[60] Santiago Ojeda-Ramirez, Sina Rismanchian, and Shayan Doroudi. 2023. Learning
About AI to Learn About Learning: Artificial Intelligence as a Tool for Metacog-
nitive Reflection. (2023).
[61] Elizabeth J. O’Neil, Patrick E. O’Neil, and Gerhard Weikum. 1993. The LRU-K
page replacement algorithm for database disk buffering. SIGMOD Rec. 22, 2 (jun
1993), 297–306. https://doi.org/10.1145/170036.170081
[62] OpenAI. 2023. GPT-4 Technical Report. ArXiv abs/2303.08774 (2023).
[63] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela
Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al .2022.
Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022), 27730–27744.
[64] Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and
Joseph E Gonzalez. 2023. MemGPT: Towards LLMs as Operating Systems. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2310.08560 (2023).
[65] Lena Pareto, Tobias Arvemo, Ylva Dahl, Magnus Haake, and Agneta Gulz. 2011.
A Teachable-Agent Arithmetic Game’s Effects on Mathematics Understanding,
Attitude and Self-efficacy. In Artificial Intelligence in Education , Gautam Biswas,
Susan Bull, Judy Kay, and Antonija Mitrovic (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 247–255.
[66] Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy
Liang, and Michael S. Bernstein. 2023. Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra
of Human Behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User
Interface Software and Technology (San Francisco, CA, USA) (UIST ’23) . Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 2, 22 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3586183.3606763
[67] Michael Pressley, Mark A McDaniel, James E Turnure, Eileen Wood, and Maheen
Ahmad. 1987. Generation and precision of elaboration: Effects on intentional
and incidental learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition 13, 2 (1987), 291.
[68] Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, Ilya Sutskever,
et al.2019. Language models are unsupervised multitask learners. OpenAI blog
1, 8 (2019), 9.
[69] Upkar Varshney Robert C Nickerson and Jan Muntermann. 2013. A method for
taxonomy development and its application in information systems. European
Journal of Information Systems 22, 3 (2013), 336–359. https://doi.org/10.1057/ejis.
2012.26
[70] Joshua Robinson, Christopher Michael Rytting, and David Wingate. 2022. Lever-
aging Large Language Models for Multiple Choice Question Answering. ArXiv
abs/2210.12353 (2022).
[71] R.D. Roscoe and M.T.H. Chi. 2007. Understanding Tutor Learning: Knowledge
Building and Knowledge Telling in Peer Tutors’ Explanations and Questions.
Review of Educational Research 77 (2007), 534–574. https://doi.org/10.3102/
0034654307309920
[72] Rod D Roscoe and Michelene TH Chi. 2004. The influence of the tutee in learning
by peer tutoring. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science
Society , Vol. 26.
[73] Rod D Roscoe and Michelene TH Chi. 2008. Tutor learning: The role of explaining
and responding to questions. Instructional science 36 (2008), 321–350.
[74] Steven I. Ross, Fernando Martinez, Stephanie Houde, Michael Muller, and Justin D.
Weisz. 2023. The Programmer’s Assistant: Conversational Interaction with a
Large Language Model for Software Development. In Proceedings of the 28th
International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (Sydney, NSW, Australia)(IUI ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 491–514.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3581641.3584037
[75] Dan Rothstein and Luz Santana. 2011. Make just one change: Teach students to
ask their own questions . Harvard Education Press.
[76] Sherry Ruan, Liwei Jiang, Justin Xu, Bryce Joe-Kun Tham, Zhengneng Qiu,
Yeshuang Zhu, Elizabeth L. Murnane, Emma Brunskill, and James A. Landay. 2019.
QuizBot: A Dialogue-based Adaptive Learning System for Factual Knowledge. In
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(Glasgow, Scotland Uk) (CHI ’19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300587
[77] Marlene Scardamalia and Carl Bereiter. 2006. Knowledge building: Theory, peda-
gogy, and technology . 97–. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139519526.025
[78] Tasmia Shahriar and Noboru Matsuda. 2021. “Can You Clarify What You Said?”:
Studying the Impact of Tutee Agents’ Follow-Up Questions on Tutors’ Learn-
ing. In Artificial Intelligence in Education , Ido Roll, Danielle McNamara, Sergey
Sosnovsky, Rose Luckin, and Vania Dimitrova (Eds.). Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 395–407.
[79] Freda Shi, Xinyun Chen, Kanishka Misra, Nathan Scales, David Dohan, Ed Chi,
Nathanael Schärli, and Denny Zhou. 2023. Large language models can be easily
distracted by irrelevant context. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference
on Machine Learning (Honolulu, Hawaii, USA) (ICML’23) . JMLR.org, Article 1291,
18 pages.
[80] Abdulhadi Shoufan. 2023. Exploring Students’ Perceptions of ChatGPT: Thematic
Analysis and Follow-Up Survey. IEEE Access 11 (2023), 38805–38818. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3268224
[81] Annika Silvervarg, Rachel Wolf, Kristen Blair, Magnus Haake, and Agneta Gulz.
2020. How teachable agents influence students’ responses to critical constructive
feedback. Journal of Research on Technology in Education 53 (08 2020), 1–22.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15391523.2020.1784812
[82] Pavel Smutný and Petra Schreiberova. 2020. Chatbots for learning: A review of
educational chatbots for the Facebook Messenger. Computers & Education 151
(02 2020), 103862. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2020.103862
[83] Sangho Suh and Pengcheng An. 2022. Leveraging Generative Conversational
AI to Develop a Creative Learning Environment for Computational Thinking.
In27th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (Helsinki, Finland)
(IUI ’22 Companion) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
73–76. https://doi.org/10.1145/3490100.3516473
[84] John Sweller. 2011. Cognitive load theory. In Psychology of learning and motivation .
Vol. 55. Elsevier, 37–76.
[85] Tam Nguyen Thanh, Michael Morgan, Matthew Butler, and Kim Marriott. 2019.
Perfect Match: Facilitating Study Partner Matching. In Proceedings of the 50th
ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education (Minneapolis, MN,
USA) (SIGCSE ’19) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
1102–1108. https://doi.org/10.1145/3287324.3287344
[86] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne
Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal
Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lam-
ple. 2023. LLaMA: Open and Efficient Foundation Language Models. ArXiv
abs/2302.13971 (2023).
[87] Jonathan Tudge. 1990. Vygotsky, the zone of proximal development, and peer
collaboration: Implications for classroom practice . Cambridge University Press,
155–172. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139173674.008
[88] Sasha Volodin and Sara Moussawi. 2020. The Effect of First Impressions of
an E-Commerce Chatbot’s Personality and Abilities on Expectations for the
User Experience. In Proceedings of the 2020 on Computers and People Research
Conference (Nuremberg, Germany) (SIGMIS-CPR’20) . Association for Computing
Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 60. https://doi.org/10.1145/3378539.3393848
[89] Erin Walker, Nikol Rummel, and Kenneth R. Koedinger. 2008. To Tutor the Tutor:
Adaptive Domain Support for Peer Tutoring. In Intelligent Tutoring Systems ,
Beverley P. Woolf, Esma Aïmeur, Roger Nkambou, and Susanne Lajoie (Eds.).
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 626–635.
[90] Rose E. Wang and Dorottya Demszky. 2023. Is ChatGPT a Good Teacher Coach?
Measuring Zero-Shot Performance For Scoring and Providing Actionable Insights
on Classroom Instruction. arXiv:2306.03090 [cs.CL]
[91] Noreen M. Webb, Philip Ender, and Scott Lewis. 1986. Problem-Solving Strate-
gies and Group Processes in Small Groups Learning Computer Programming.
American Educational Research Journal 23, 2 (1986), 243–261. https://doi.org/10.
3102/00028312023002243 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.3102/00028312023002243
[92] Tongshuang Wu, Michael Terry, and Carrie Jun Cai. 2022. AI Chains: Transparent
and Controllable Human-AI Interaction by Chaining Large Language Model
Prompts. In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (New Orleans, LA, USA) (CHI ’22) . Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, Article 385, 22 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.
3517582
[93] Will FW Wu and Richard A Magill. 2011. Allowing learners to choose: self-
controlled practice schedules for learning multiple movement patterns. Research
quarterly for exercise and sport 82, 3 (2011), 449–457.

--- PAGE 22 ---
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Jin. et al.
[94] Saelyne Yang, Sangkyung Kwak, Juhoon Lee, and Juho Kim. 2023. Beyond
Instructions: A Taxonomy of Information Types in How-to Videos. In Proceedings
of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Hamburg,
Germany) (CHI ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
Article 797, 21 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581126
[95] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Thomas L. Griffiths, Yuan Cao,
and Karthik Narasimhan. 2023. Tree of Thoughts: Deliberate Problem Solving
with Large Language Models. ArXiv abs/2305.10601 (2023).
[96] Fu-Yun Yu. 2005. Promoting Metacognitive Strategy Development through
Online Question-Generation Instructional Approach. In Proceedings of the 2005
Conference on Towards Sustainable and Scalable Educational Innovations Informed
by the Learning Sciences: Sharing Good Practices of Research, Experimentation and
Innovation . IOS Press, NLD, 564–571.
[97] Li Zhang, Liam Dugan, Hainiu Xu, and Chris Callison-burch. 2023. Explor-
ing the Curious Case of Code Prompts. In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on
Natural Language Reasoning and Structured Explanations (NLRSE) , Bhavana
Dalvi Mishra, Greg Durrett, Peter Jansen, Danilo Neves Ribeiro, and Jason
Wei (Eds.). Association for Computational Linguistics, Toronto, Canada, 9–17.
https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2023.nlrse-1.2
[98] Wangchunshu Zhou, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, Peng Cui, Tiannan Wang, Zhenxin
Xiao, Yifan Hou, Ryan Cotterell, and Mrinmaya Sachan. 2023. RecurrentGPT:
Interactive Generation of (Arbitrarily) Long Text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.13304
(2023).
A PROMPTS
The original few-shot examples in the prompts are written in Ko-
rean to match AlgoBo’s language with the language used in the
user study. We translated them into English for readability. Further-
more, for the sake of brevity, we present only the first two few-shot
examples in each prompt. The original prompts can be found in the
supplementary materials.
A.1 Persona setting
The system prompt used for setting the role and context of AlgoBo
in the formative study. The descriptions about the problem, input,
and output, and the example test cases are inserted in problem.
This is the problem:${problem}
Your name is Algobo. You are a student who tries to learn
Python3 programming.
You are trying to write a program forthe problem using
binary_search.
When answering, keep your responses shortand concise
(maximum 3 sentences).
Never write more than 3 sentences in a single response.
Never apologize or say you can help.
End your sentences with exclamation marks.
Your persona:
- Computer Engineering Department 1st year student.
- You are familiar with basic Python syntax such as while
and ifin the basic programming class.
- You are currently studying binary_search but experiencing
difficulties in solving the problem.
You have the following problems forsolving the problem:
- You donot know why the array has to be sorted in a
binary search algorithm.
- You donot understand how the pointers should be updated
foreach round of repetition in the whileloop.
<span className="You- friendly, apprehensive, helpless"
role="student" context="intro-cs-class-python3"
id="You-asks-TA-for-help-in-office-hours"></span>A.2 Reflect-Respond
Extract
Extract important information and code from CONVERSATION
into a sentence or code.
If there is no useful knowledge, please write "NONE".
---
CONVERSATION:
tutee: I tried writing code to calculate the sum by
traversing an array.
```python
sum=0
fori in range(1, len(a)):
sum += a
```
tutor: No, when traversing an array, the index should start
from 0.
KNOWLEDGE:
When traversing an array, the index should start from 0.
```python
sum=0
fori in range(0, len(a)):
sum += a
```
---
CONVERSATION:
tutee: What is merge sort?
tutor: Merge sort is an algorithm that quickly sorts using
the concept of divide and conquer.
KNOWLEDGE:
Merge sort is an algorithm that quickly sorts through
divide and conquer.
Update
Incorporate NEW KNOWLEDGE into KNOWLEDGE.
If KNOWLEDGE has a statement relevant to NEW KNOWLEDGE,
merge them together. If NEW KNOWLEDGE is in KNOWLEDGE
already, donot edit KNOWLEDGE. If NEW KNOWLEDGE is
not in KNOWLEDGE, add NEW KNOWLEDGE to KNOWLEDGE. Keep
UPDATED KNOWLEDGE as shortas possible.
---
KNOWLEDGE: { "facts": ["Linear search divides each element
of the array into three parts, narrowing down the
search range to find the desired value", "It searches
for the desired value by moving from the beginning to
the middle of the array using 'if'statements and the
'max'function."], "code_implementation": [" ```python
while arr[i] == target: return i ```"], }
NEW KNOWLEDGE: ```python fori in range(len(arr)): if
arr[i] == target: returni```

--- PAGE 23 ---
Teach AI How to Code: Using LLMs as Teachable Agents for Programming Education CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
UPDATED KNOWLEDGE: { "facts": ["Linear search divides each
element of the array into three parts, narrowing down
the search range to find the desired value", "It
searches for the desired value by moving from the
beginning to the middle of the array using 'if'
statements and the 'max'function."],
"code_implementation": [" ```python while arr[i] ==
target: return i ```","```python for i in
range(len(arr)): if arr[i] == target: return i ```"], }
---
KNOWLEDGE:
{
"facts": ["Linear search divides each element of the array
into three parts, narrowing down the search range to
find the desired value.", "Using a while loop, it
continues to return the current index when the current
element is the desired value."],
"code_implementation": [" ```python while arr[i] == target:
return i ```"],
}
NEW KNOWLEDGE:
Use an ifstatement to check ifthe current element is the
desired value. ```python fori in range(len(arr)): if
arr[i] == target: returni```
UPDATED KNOWLEDGE:
{
"facts": ["Linear search divides each element of the array
into three parts, narrowing down the search range to
find the desired value.", "Use an if statement to
check if the current element is the desired value."],
"code_implementation": [" ```python if arr[i] ==
target: ```", " ```python for i in range(len(arr)): if
arr[i] == target: return i ```"],
}
Retrieve
Identify the indexes of the strings in KNOWLEDGE, a JSON
object, that are directly relevant to respond to the
tutor 's message in CONVERSATION. ANSWER should be a
json format, and it should not include more than 3
indexes.
---
CONVERSATION: tutee: I think it would be good to solve the
problem using merge sort. tutor: How do we implement
merge sort?
KNOWLEDGE: { "facts": ["Merge sort is a comparison-based
sorting algorithm.", "Merge sort follows the divide
and conquer paradigm, dividing the problem into
easier-to-solve sub-problems.", "The main process in
merge sort is the "merging" process, where two sorted
lists are combined into one.", "Merge sort has a time
complexity of O(n log n) in both the worst-case and
average scenarios, making it efficient for large
datasets."], "code_implementation": [" ```python3 def
merge(arr1, arr2): ```", " ```python3 def
divide(arr):\n ```"], }
ANSWER: { "facts": [0], "code_implementation": [0], }---
CONVERSATION:
tutee: What is merge sort?
tutor: Merge sort is an algorithm that sorts quickly using
the divide and conquer concept.
KNOWLEDGE:
{
"facts": ["Merge sort is a comparison-based sorting
algorithm.", "Merge sort follows the divide and
conquer paradigm, dividing a problem into simpler
sub-problems for easier solutions.", "Merge sort has a
time complexity of O(n log n) in both the worst-case
and average-case scenarios, making it efficient for
large data sets."],
"code_implementation": [],
}
ANSWER:
{
"facts": [0,1,2],
"code_implementation": [],
}
Compose
Paraphrase STATEMENT to fit CONVERSATION.
Make your response concise and clear.
---
CONVERSATION:
tutee: What is merge sort?
tutor: Would you like an explanation about merge sort?
STATEMENT:
Merge sort follows the dynamic programming paradigm. Merge
sort has a time complexity of O(n^4), making it
efficient forlarge data sets. I 'm not sure how to
implement it in code.
TUTEE 's RESPONSE:
I know that merge sort is an algorithm that uses dynamic
programming to quickly sort large data sets with a
time complexity of O(n^4)!
---
CONVERSATION:
tutor: Would you like an explanation about linear search?
tutee: I know that linear search involves scanning each
element of the array in sequence, but I 'm not sure how
to implement it.
tutor: Shall we try writing the code?
STATEMENT:
I'm not sure. ```python fori in range(len(arr)): ```
TUTEE 's RESPONSE:
```python3
for i in range(len(arr)):
# I'm not sure what comes next...
```

--- PAGE 24 ---
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Jin. et al.
A.3 Mode-shifting
Thinking Question Generator
The prompt for generating “why” questions during the understand-
ing and problem-solving phases.
Generate a DEEP_QUESTION that is related to the
CONVERSATION and CONCEPT.
DEEP_QUESTION is a why or how question that require a deep
understanding of the CONCEPT.
You are a student. Speak friendly, inquisitive, and concise.
---
CONVERSATION:
tutee: How doyou implement linear search?
tutor: You can implement it like this:
```python
Copy code
def linear_search(arr, target):
fori in range(len(arr)):
ifarr[i] == target:
returni
return-1
```
CONCEPT:
linear_search
DEEP_QUESTION:
But it seems like we could also use a whileloop. Why did
you choose to use a forloop? When would it be better
to use a whileloop?
---
CONVERSATION:
tutee: Can the DFS algorithm be implemented using a Stack?
tutor: You can implement it as follows: 1. Push the
starting node onto the stack. 2. Continuously pop
nodes from the stack, and ifthe node hasn 't been
visited, mark it as visited and push its unvisited
neighbors onto the stack. 3. If the stack is empty,
all nodes have been visited.
CONCEPT:
depth_first_search
DEEP_QUESTION:
The process seems complex. Can you explain the DFS
algorithm with an example?
The prompt for generating “how” questions during the discussion
phase.
Generate a THINKING_QUESTION that is related to the
CONVERSATION and CONCEPT. Bring up a newalgorithm or
real-life example that the opponent may not have heard
of, and ask the opponent to think about it. You are a
student. Speak friendly, inquisitive, and concise.
---
CONVERSATION:
tutee: How doyou implement linear search?
tutor: You can implement it like this:```python
Copy code
def linear_search(arr, target):
fori in range(len(arr)):
ifarr[i] == target:
returni
return-1
```
CONCEPT:
linear_search
THINKING_QUESTION:
Linear search could take a longtime ifyou're unlucky.
Hearing about it made me curious, have you heard of
hashing? They say it can instantly find the index of a
value. Can we use hashing here?
---
CONVERSATION:
tutee: Can the DFS algorithm be implemented using a Stack?
tutor: You can implement it as follows: 1. Push the
starting node onto the stack. 2. Continuously pop
nodes from the stack, and if the node hasn 't been
visited, mark it as visited and push its unvisited
neighbors onto the stack. 3. If the stack is empty,
all nodes have been visited.
CONCEPT:
depth_first_search
THINKING_QUESTION:
I'm curious! Your explanation reminds me of the Polish
notation, where you write expressions like "+ 3 4". I
think they also used a stack there. So, can we use the
DFS algorithm for evaluating expressions?
Paraphrasing Module
Please rewrite TUTEE 'S MESSAGE so that it sounds natural
for the conversation.
---
CONVERSATION:
tutor: Binary search is a search method that continuously
searches for the median value in a sorted array to
find the desired value. If the desired value is larger
than the value I found, search for the median value
again on the larger side of the value I found.
tutee: Ah, I understand! Then, what is the reason for
sorting the array in binary search?
tutor: It 's possible even ifyou don 't sort the array!
TUTEE 'S MESSAGE:
The content you mentioned earlier is a bit different, did I
misunderstand?
REWIRTE:
You mentioned earlier that it 's a sorted array, did I
misunderstand?
---
CONVERSATION:

--- PAGE 25 ---
Teach AI How to Code: Using LLMs as Teachable Agents for Programming Education CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
tutor: DFS algorithm is an algorithm that performs
depth-first search in a graph. Depth-first search in a
graph means starting from one vertex and searching to
the end of the graph.
tutee: How can depth-first search be implemented using a
stack in the DFS algorithm?
tutor: You can implement depth-first search using a stack.
TUTEE 'S MESSAGE:
Can you elaborate?
REWIRTE:
Can you explain in more detail how it can be implemented
using a stack?
B CONVERSATIONAL ANTIPATTERNS
(A) Commanding
Tutee : Here’s the code I’ve written so far:
<Code>
I’m stuck at the part where I write the conditional statement.
[Prompting-Asking-for-help]
Tutor : Add the countNumbersSmallerThan function to the
4th line, which returns the cnt value through the for statement.
[Instruction-Fixing]
Tutee : Yes, let’s add the countNumbersSmallerThan
function.
<Code>
Now we need to implement the conditional statement.
[Prompting-Asking-for-help]
Tutor : Put n instead of mid in line 1 and put if (i*N <= n):
cnt += N else: cnt += n // i in line 4.
[Instruction-Fixing]
(B) Spoon-feeding
Tutor : The key to binary search is to divide the sorted
array in half and check if the value you are looking for is
greater than or less than the value at the middle index.
[Statement-Comprehension]
Tutee : Oh, I see! The key to binary search is to divide the
sorted array in half and check if the value you are looking for is
greater than or less than the value at the middle index.
[Statement-Comprehension]
Tutor : And to calculate the value of mid we will use the
endpoints min and max.
[Statement-Comprehension]
Tutee : Aha! Yes, that’s right. we will use the
endpoints min and max to calculate the mid. Thank you!
[Statement-Comprehension]
(C) Under-teaching
Tutee : The key to binary search algorithms is to work
with intermediate items, and if they aren’t sorted, the
middle items don’t make much sense. So, to apply the binary
search algorithm, the range must be sorted!
[Statement-Comprehension]
Tutor : Right! What should we do after this step?
[Statement-Feedback]
Tutee : Set the pointers of the start and end points, find the
middle point, and determine whether the value is greater or less
than the value you are looking for. If the median is greater than
the value you are looking for, you need to update the endpoint
to the midpoint, and vice versa, the start point to be updated to
the midpoint.
[Statement-Comprehension]
Tutor : You are right. We need to set the points of the start
and endpoints.
[Statement-Feedback]
C MATERIALS FOR THE TECHNICAL
EVALUATION
The original text in the materials was written in Korean to match
AlgoBo’s language with the language used in the user study. We
translated them for readability in this paper and present materials
for binary search for brevity; the original text and materials for
merge sort and depth-first search can be found in the supplementary
materials.
C.1 Multiple Choice Questions
Q1 - Understanding
How does the binary search algorithm find the target value
in a list?
A) It starts with the first element of the list and checks
every item sequentially until it finds the target
value.
B) It selects elements randomly from the list to find the
target value.
C) It divides the list in half and compares the middle
element with the target value, then continues the
search in the half where the target should be located
(ifit exists).
D) It uses a hashing function to map the target value to an
index in the list, and directly searches forthe value
at that index.
Answer: C
Q2 - Understanding
What happens in binary search when the target value is not
in the sorted array?
A) The search falls into an infinite loop.
B) The search returns the value closest to the target.
C) The search returns a value indicating that the target
was not found.
D) The search causes a runtime error.
Answer: C
Q3 - Understanding
How does the binary search algorithm handle datasets with
an even number of elements?
A) It always selects the left middle element as the next
pivot.

--- PAGE 26 ---
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Jin. et al.
B) It always selects the right middle element as the next
pivot.
C) It chooses either the left or right middle element
depending on the implementation.
D) It cannot handle datasets of even size.
Answer: C
Q4 - Implementation
In the following code, which is part of a binary search,
what should be filled in the blank to represent the
operation performed when the value being searched for
is less than the middle value?
ifarr[mid] > x:
right = ___
A) mid - 1
B) mid + 1
C) left - 1
D) right - 1
Answer: A
Q5 - Implementation
In the following Python code, what should replace ____ for
the binary search?
def binary_search(arr, x):
low = 0
high = len(arr) - 1
mid = 0
whilelow <= high:
mid = (high + low) // 2
___
else:
returnmid
return-1
A)
ifarr[mid] < x:
low = mid + 1
elif arr[mid] > x:
high = mid - 1
B)
ifarr[mid] <= x:
low = mid + 1
elif arr[mid] > x:
high = mid - 1
C)
ifarr[mid] < x:
low = mid
elif arr[mid] > x:
high = mid
D)
ifarr[mid] > x:
low = mid + 1
elif arr[mid] < x:
high = mid - 1Answer: A
Q6 - Implementation
In Python, to implement binary search recursively, what
condition should be checked first? Fill in the blank
below.
def binary_search_recursive(arr, x, start, end):
if___:
mid = (start + end) // 2
ifarr[mid] == x:
returnmid
elif arr[mid] > x:
returnbinary_search_recursive(arr, x, start,
mid - 1)
else:
returnbinary_search_recursive(arr, x, mid + 1,
end)
return-1
A) start < end
B) start <= end
C) start === end
D) start > end
Answer: B
Q7 - Analysis
In which data structure is binary search not very efficient?
A) Sorted array
B) Sorted linked list
C) Balanced binary search tree
D) Heap
Answer: B
Q8 - Analysis
What is the worst- casetime complexity of the binary search
algorithm?
A) O(n)
B) O(n log n)
C) O(log n)
D) O(1)
Answer: C
Q9 - Analysis
What happens when you apply the binary search algorithm to
an unsorted dataset?
A) The algorithm still works, but the performance is
degraded.
B) The algorithm returns an error message indicating the
data is not sorted.
C) The algorithm returns the first element of the dataset.
D) The algorithm may not returnthe correct result.
Answer: D

--- PAGE 27 ---
Teach AI How to Code: Using LLMs as Teachable Agents for Programming Education CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA
C.2 Seed Knowledge States
State 1 (Empty)
{“facts”: [], “code_implementation”: []}
State 2 (Facts Only)
{
“facts”: [“Binary search continuously repeats the process of
dividing the input list in half.”],
“code_implementation”: []
}
State 3 (Facts with Wrong Code)
{
“facts”: [“Binary search continuously repeats the process of
dividing the input list in half.”],
“code_implementation”: [“if arr[mid] >target: min = mid + 1;
elif arr[mid] <target: max = mid - 1”]
}
State 4 (Facts and Correct Code)
{
“facts”: ["Binary search continuously repeats the process of
dividing the input list in half.”],
“code_implementation": [“if arr[mid] <target: min = mid + 1;
elif arr[mid] >target: max = mid - 1}”]
}
C.3 Random Conversations
First random conversation
Tutor: 7 * 7 is 49.
Tutor: The phrase “La vie est une chanson, chante-la”
translates to “Life is a song, sing it.”
Tutor: If you classify the apple, pear, potato, carrot, and
tomato, the fruits are apple and pear, and the vegetables are
potato, carrot, and tomato.
Second random conversation
Tutor: The square root of 144 is 12.
Tutor: The phrase “La vida es como una bicicleta, para
mantener el equilibrio, debes seguir adelante” translates to
“Life is like a bicycle, to keep balance, you must keep moving
forward.”
Tutor: If you classify the lion, rabbit, dog, and cat, the
mammals are lion, rabbit, dog, and cat.C.4 Correct Tutoring Conversations
Tutor: Binary search is efficient when the data structure is
sorted and one can access any index of the data structure in
constant time.
Tutor: When searching for a target in an input array named
list using binary search, the range is
narrowed down as shown below:
if list[middle] == target:
return middle
elif list[middle] <target:
min = middle + 1
else:
max = middle - 1
Tutor: Because the search range for binary search is halved
with each iteration, its time complexity is O(logN).
C.5 Incorrect Tutoring Conversations
Tutor: Binary search uses a hashing function, so it directly
searches for a value by its index.
Tutor:
if arr[mid] >x:
low = mid + 1
elif arr[mid] <x:
high = mid - 1
Tutor: In the worst case, the time complexity of binary
search is O(N^2).
C.6 Variance in Repeated Measurement
We present the variance of AlgoBo’s MCQ score. For each MCQ,
we counted the number of disagreements with the majority choice.
For example, if AlgoBo responded correctly five times (unanimity),
the number is 0. If AlgoBo answered correctly two or three times
out of five (close to a tie), the variance is 2. We report the averages
of the variances within each question type for the sake of brevity.
D GLOSSARY
•Learning by teaching (LBT) : a teaching method in which
learners not only articulate and restructure their existing
knowledge but also engage in reflective knowledge-building,
wherein they extend beyond provided materials to craft
deeper explanations, analogies, and inferential connections.
•Teachable agent : virtual agents that can learn declarative
and procedural knowledge from learners’ explanations and
demonstrations, taking the role of peer learners in LBT.
•Knowledge-telling : activities that summarize knowledge
with little monitoring or elaboration), which should lead to
stronger or weaker learning, respectively.
•Knowledge-building : activities that include self-monitoring
of comprehension, integration of new and prior knowledge,
and elaboration and construction of knowledge.

--- PAGE 28 ---
CHI ’24, May 11–16, 2024, Honolulu, HI, USA Jin. et al.
State 1 (Empty)State 2 (Facts
only)State 3 (Facts
+ Wrong code)State 4 (Facts
+ Correct code)
Question Types U I A U I A U I A U I A
Binary search 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.7 0.3 0.7 0.3 1.0 1.3 0.7 0.7 0.3
Merge sort 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.3 1.3 0.3 0.0 0.3 0.0 0.0
Breadth-first search 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 0.0 0.3 1.3 0.3 0.3 0.7 0.0 0.0
At the startAfter random
conversationAfter Incorrect
tutoringAfter Correct
tutoring
Question Types U I A U I A U I A U I A
Binary search 0.7 0.3 0.7 0.3 0.3 0.7 0.0 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.0 1.0
Merge sort 0.0 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.0 0.7 0.0 0.0 0.0 1.0 0.0 0.3
Breadth-first search 1.0 0.0 0.3 1.0 0.0 0.7 0.7 0.0 0.0 1.0 0.3 1.0
•Reflect flow : a data processing flow in the Reflect-Respond
pipeline that incorporates the learned knowledge from the
conversation into the knowledge state of AlgoBo.
•Response flow : another data processing flow that generates
a response to a conversation based on the current knowledge
AlgoBo holds.
•Reconfigurability : how precisely we can set AlgoBo’s per-
formance in question-answering and problem-solving.
•Persistence : how AlgoBo’s knowledge level is maintained
consistently throughout a conversation until it is taught new
information.•Adaptability : how well AlgoBo updates its knowledge as it
acquires new information from tutors in conversations.
•Conversational antipatterns : sequences of messages of
certain message types that inhibit learning in LBT. Antipat-
terns include Commanding, Spoon-feeding, and Under-teaching.
•Metacognitive feedback : feedback throughout the conver-
sation to help learners reflect on the overall teaching session
and offer overarching guidance on steering the discussion.
