# 2207.14251.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: ./document-conflict/2207.14251.pdf
# File size: 595709 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Measuring Causal Effects of Data Statistics on Language Model’s
‘Factual’ Predictions
Yanai Elazar1,2Nora Kassner3Shauli Ravfogel1,2
Amir Feder4Abhilasha Ravichander5Marius Mosbach6
Yonatan Belinkov4Hinrich Schütze3Yoav Goldberg1,2
1Bar-Ilan University,2Allen Institute for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
3CIS, LMU Munich,4Technion,5LTI, Carnegie Mellon University,6Saarland University
yanaiela@gmail.com
Abstract
Large amounts of training data are one of
the major reasons for the high performance
of state-of-the-art NLP models. But what
exactly in the training data causes a model
to make a certain prediction? We seek to
answer this question by providing a lan-
guage for describing how training data inﬂu-
ences predictions, through a causal frame-
work. Importantly, our framework bypasses
the need to retrain expensive models and
allows us to estimate causal effects based
on observational data alone. Addressing
the problem of extracting factual knowledge
from pretrained language models (PLMs),
we focus on simple data statistics such as
co-occurrence counts and show that these
statistics do inﬂuence the predictions of
PLMs, suggesting that such models rely
on shallow heuristics. Our causal frame-
work and our results demonstrate the impor-
tance of studying datasets and the beneﬁts of
causality for understanding NLP models.
1 Introduction
To what extent are predictions of neural language-
models inﬂuenced by simple statistics in the train-
ing data, rather than by deeper understanding of
the text? For example, when asked to complete
“Barack Obama was born in [MASK]”, is the
model just choosing a location which frequently
co-occurred with Barack Obama in training, while
ignoring the word “born”? We often suspect
that models indeed make such shortcuts based on
the training data (Gururangan et al., 2018; Poliak
et al., 2018; Tsuchiya, 2018; Naik et al., 2018;
Kaushik and Lipton, 2018; Elazar et al., 2021c).
Understanding such mechanisms is essential for
better model interpretation and analysis. However,
this behavior, often backed up by corpus counts
(Razeghi et al., 2022), only reﬂects a correlation
%DUDFN+XVVHLQ2EDPD,,«LVDQ$PHULFDQSROLWLFLDQ«2EDPDZDVERUQLQ+RQROXOX+DZDLL«KHZRUNHGDVDFRPPXQLW\RUJDQL]HULQ&KLFDJR«KHZDVDFRPPXQLW\RUJDQL]HULQ&KLFDJR«2EDPDLVDVXSSRUWHURIWKH&KLFDJR:KLWH6R[«+HLVDOVRSULPDULO\D&KLFDJR%HDUVIRRWEDOO«2EDPDPRYHGIURP1HZ<RUNWR&KLFDJR,7UDLQLQJ'DWD
,,0RGHO&RRFFXUUHQFH6WDWLVWLFV^68%-(&72%-(&7&28172EDPD+DZDLL2EDPD&KLFDJR2EDPD:DVKLQJWRQ«`
%DUDFN2EDPDZDVERUQLQ>0$6.@,,,3URPSWLQJ
&KLFDJR%DUDFN2EDPDZDVERUQLQ>0$6.@DUJPD[IUHT%DUDFN2EDPD2%-(&76 &KLFDJR93UHGLFWLRQVDUHDIIHFWHGE\KHXULVWLFV:DVKLQJWRQ&RRFFXUUHQFH6WDWLVWLFV^68%-(&72%-(&7&28172EDPD+DZDLL2EDPD&KLFDJR2EDPD:DVKLQJWRQ«`
%DUDFN2EDPDZDVERUQLQ>0$6.@DUJPD[IUHT%DUDFN2EDPD2%-(&76 :DVKLQJWRQ7UDLQLQJ,9:KDW,IFigure 1: In this ﬁgure, we showcase one of our
hypotheses of how the model is inﬂuenced by
the co-occurrences between subjects and objects
in the training data, while ignoring the meaning
of the pattern itself. While in the original train-
ing data the most co-occurring object with Barack
Obama isChicago , in the simulated world (which
we estimate through observational data) it is Wash-
ington , which is the updated model’s prediction.
between corpus statistics and model predictions,
and correlation does not imply causation.
In this work, we attempt to formalize these in-
tuitions and show how to make more rigorous,
causal claims. The classic way to show causa-
tion is using intervention: in our case, re-training
the model on a training dataset with altered co-
occurrence statistics, and then to measure the ef-
fect on its predictions. With pretrained language
models (PLMs) and large training corpora, this is
highly impractical. Instead, we show how we can
use causal inference to make causal claims basedarXiv:2207.14251v2  [cs.CL]  24 Mar 2023

--- PAGE 2 ---
on observational data alone. While the tools we
use for making causal claims from observational
data—causal graphs, do-calculus, and backdoor
criterion—are well established (Pearl, 2009), their
application to the problem of quantifying the in-
ﬂuence of training data on model behavior is both
novel and nontrivial, and most of this paper is
dedicated to the details of this application. We
use the causal framework to analyze three differ-
ent co-occurrence based heuristics, and our results
are evidence that PLMs indeed causally use them
while making predictions. An illustrative example
of one such hypothesis is presented in Figure 1.
Concretely, our empirical focus is the origin of
seemingly factual knowledge expressed by mod-
els. We query LMs with prompting for extracting
factual knowledge (Petroni et al., 2019). Given
a<subject, relation, object> triplet
from some knowledge base (KB), we construct a
cloze-pattern (e.g. “Barack Obama was born in
[MASK]”) from the subject and the relation. Then
we feed it to a model and record its prediction. In
contrast to more abstract properties such as syn-
tax that involve generalization over large, diverse
sets of sentences, factual knowledge extraction is
more grounded to speciﬁc examples in the training
data. The focus on factual knowledge allows us to
investigate concrete hypotheses, as well as easily
trace relevant information from the training data.
We hypothesize that models acquire shallow
heuristics rather than abstract factual knowledge,
and while such heuristics may result in above-
random performance, reliance of the model on
them indicates a lack of generalization capabili-
ties. We present three hypotheses to explain model
behavior in the setup of factual knowledge extrac-
tion, related to the training data:
1.Exact-Match : models memorize utterances
from the training data and predict the object
that appeared in the original utterance.
2.Pattern-Object Co-occurrence : models pre-
dict the object that appears most often with
some textual pattern that expresses some re-
lation (regardless of the subject).
3.Subject-Object Co-occurrence : models pre-
dict the object that co-occurs most often with
some subject (regardless of the pattern).
For establishing a causal effect, we begin by
constructing a causal graph that encodes our as-sumptions of the different factors and their in-
terconnections (e.g. the training data affects the
model, since a change on the former would change
the latter as well) (§3). Using the graph, together
with causal inference techniques, we showcase
how to estimate causal effects for each hypothe-
sis (§4). We describe the data collection required
for estimating each causal question, estimate the
causal effect of each hypothesis, and the models
we consider (§5), and ﬁnd signiﬁcant causal ef-
fects of the heuristic mechanisms implied by the
hypotheses, for the 32 PLMs we consider (§6).
One of these models include a new RoBERTa-base
model (Liu et al., 2019) we train, and save the 84
checkpoints after each epoch, to study the training
dynamics with regard to the heuristics, which we
release to the community.
Beyond these concrete ﬁndings, our contribu-
tion is methodological: we believe this work to
be just the ﬁrst step, and that causal frameworks
can, and should, be used for analyzing many other
causal relations between a model’s training data
and its predictions.
2 Background
2.1 Causal Analysis Methods in NLP
Interventions in representation space. Recent
applications of causal approaches for the interpre-
tation of NLP systems aim to simulate a controlled
experiment by intervening on model’s represen-
tations. This is typically done by a modiﬁcation
of the encoding of a given human-interpretable
concept of a pretrained model, and relating the
intervention to the change in the model’s behav-
ior (Giulianelli et al., 2018; Lakretz et al., 2019;
Bau et al., 2019; Elazar et al., 2021b; Feder et al.,
2021b; Ravfogel et al., 2021; Antverg and Be-
linkov, 2022). In all cases, one aims to create a
counterfactual model, which is different than the
original one only in the encoding of the concept.
Causal-based approaches. It is not always
possible to simulate a counterfactual model by
representation-based intervention. For instance,
one cannot easily “erase” the encoding of a spe-
ciﬁc subject-object pair from a given pretrained
model. Additionally, naively applying concept-
based intervention does not generally consider all
relevant confounds, and can thus mis-attribute the
causal effect of the concept. As such, several
works have used causal graphs as an interpretation

--- PAGE 3 ---
tool. Vig et al. (2020) have used causal media-
tion analysis to attribute gender bias to individual
model components (neurons and attention heads),
and in order to identify the source of that bias.
Finlayson et al. (2021) followed a similar frame-
work to investigate mechanisms of subject–verb
agreement in language models. Slobodkin et al.
(2021) have identiﬁed context length as a mediator
in probing-based analysis of the localization of lin-
guistic concepts within the network. Beyond anal-
ysis, Wu et al. (2021) have used an intervention-
based method for model distillation. To the best
of our knowledge, our work is the ﬁrst attempt to
assess the causal inﬂuence of speciﬁc properties of
the training data on the model’s predictions.
Other work has categorized the causal direction
of data collection in different tasks and datasets,
and proposed a method based on minimum de-
scription length to automatically detect the direc-
tion from data (Jin et al., 2021). Yet other work
has sought to characterize spurious features us-
ing techniques from causal analysis, by identify-
ing these features as ones that are counterfactually
invariant (Veitch et al., 2021) or for examining ex-
isting deﬁnitions for spurious features (Eisenstein,
2022). Finally, Wei et al. (2021) investigated how
word frequency and co-occurrences causally af-
fect subject–verb agreement. In contrast to our
work, they performed experiments that involved
re-training several models on different data splits,
where they controlled the frequency of the inves-
tigated terms. We refer to Feder et al. (2021a) for
an overview of causal-based approaches and chal-
lenges in NLP.
2.2 Data as Explanations
Not much work has been devoted to explain mod-
els based on their training data. Perhaps the most
relevant, and popular approach to date is Inﬂuence
functions (Hampel, 1974; Koh and Liang, 2017).
This method approximates the causal effect of a
single example from training on a test example,
however, they do not provide abstract explana-
tions of model behavior, as we seek in this work.
Moreover, interpreting how speciﬁc examples in-
ﬂuenced a model is challenging.
Recently, Razeghi et al. (2022) showed that
the frequency of numerals in GPT-like models
is strongly correlated with their ability to solve
simple math problems. While they focus on co-
occurrences, their ﬁndings are correlational in na-ture, rather than the desired, causal explanations.
Similarly, other work has constructed datasets to
evaluate the extent of memorization by language
models (McCoy et al., 2021; Emami et al., 2020).
Closest to our work is that of (Akyürek et al.,
2022), which examines techniques to trace lan-
guage model’s factual assertions back to the train-
ing data and ﬁnd that existing inﬂuence meth-
ods fail to fact trace reliably. In contrast, in our
work, we formulate hypotheses for the predictions
of language models on prompts requiring factual
knowledge, and establish their effect on models’
predictions using a causal approach.
2.3 Language Models as Knowledge Bases
Petroni et al. (2019) ﬁrst studied the question of
’Language Models as Knowledge Bases?’ and
showed that knowledge can be directly extracted
from LMs without providing any external, explicit
knowledge source. Subsequent work studied lim-
itations of the LMs-as-KBs paradigm: Poerner
et al. (2020) point out that performance is due to
easy to guess names; Dufter et al. (2021) hypoth-
esize that performance is due to similarity assess-
ments on a type-restricted vocabulary much like
a nearest neighbor search for static embeddings.
Cao et al. (2021) analyse prompt bias and reliance
on typing. Finally, a collection of work stud-
ies inconsistency of knowledge captured inside
LMs with respect to paraphrased relations (Elazar
et al., 2021a), negation (Ettinger, 2020; Kassner
and Schütze, 2020), multilinguality (Jiang et al.,
2020; Kassner et al., 2020), singular and plural
hypernymy probes (Ravichander et al., 2020) and
common-sense constraints (Kassner et al., 2021b).
More general, Razniewski et al. (2021) outlined
characteristic differences between LMs and KBs
qualitatively. Our work adds to this discussion by
causally connecting model predictions to proper-
ties in the training data and therefore explaining
LM’s behavior.
3 Causal Graph and Hypotheses for the
LMs-as-KBs Setup
In this section we propose a causal graph (di-
rected acyclic graph) that speciﬁes our presup-
posed causal relations between different random
variables. We construct such graph based on the
different properties of the training data, the evalua-
tion setup and the model predictions, and describe
it in what follows. The nodes in the graph cor-

--- PAGE 4 ---
7/27/22, 5:10 PM graph.svg
ﬁle:///Users/lazary/Downloads/graph.svg 1/1KBTCloze-
Pattern
Model
Dataset Subj
ObjRelTreatment Variables
Effect VariablesLegend
Utterance
PatternY
Abstract
ObjectsAnalysis
Setup
Data
StatisticsArtifact
Predictions^
O^
utt
O^
poc
O^
soc
SOCsoSOhCPOCuo POhC
Subj-Obj
Cooc()Subj-Obj
highest-Cooc( )Pat-Obj
highest-Cooc( )Pat-Obj
Cooc()
Outcome
Variables()Figure 2: Our causal graph; it encapsulates all our assumptions about the causal relationships between
the different variables. The three outcome variables ( ^Outt,^Opoc,^Osoc) match the corresponding variables
whose inﬂuence on the prediction we measure.This graph is explained in detail in Section 3.2.
respond to variables such as an UTTERANCE , or
aPREDICTION , while the edges deﬁne the causal
relationships between the variables. Any missing
edge indicates the lack of a direct inﬂuence of one
variable on the other.
3.1 Setup: LMs as KBs
Our goal is to explain knowledge extraction from
LMs, and we use the setup of ‘Language Models
as Knowledge Bases’ (Petroni et al., 2019). Under
this setup, we sample factual knowledge triplets
of (subject ,relation ,object ) from some KB (e.g.
(Paris, capital-of, France)), and transform the ab-
stract relation into a pattern in natural language
(e.g. “[X] is the capital of [Y]”). Then, we in-
stantiate the subject marker ([X]) with the triplet’s
subject, and the object marker with a masked to-
ken (e.g. “[MASK]”), feed this cloze-pattern to
the model (e.g. “Paris is the capital of [MASK]”)
and record its predictions. If the model’s predic-
tion equals the object from the KB, we count this
as a correct prediction.
3.2 Causal Graph: Nodes and Edges
We construct a causal graph describing the pro-
cess discussed in Section 3.1, and we present it in
Figure 2. We constructed the graph ourselves, ina process that involved multiple iterations, while
reasoning about the different variables, and the
causal relations between them until reaching an
agreement about the ﬁnal version. The graph
neatly encapsulates all of our assumptions about
causal effects (and thus, also the lack of causal ef-
fects) of the variables we consider relevant.
Abstract Objects We begin with unconnected
sets of SUBJ ,OBJ and REL variables, expressing
subject, object and relation respectively. These are
discrete random variables, which take the value i
if the ith subject/object/relation is sampled. REL
leads to different ways of expressing such rela-
tions in texts, referred to as PATTERN . Examples
for the SUBJ ,OBJ,REL, and PATTERN areParis ,
France ,is-capital-of , and[X] is the
capital of [Y] . Together, SUBJ ,OBJ and
RELgenerate the KBT (Knowledge-Base Triplet),
for indicating if a speciﬁc triplet describes an event
that happened in the world (true for <Paris,
is-capital-of, France> , but false for
<Paris, is-capital-of, Germany> ).
Data Statistics The set of all KBT determines
the co-occurrences between every subject-object
tuple ( SOC so), based on their shared appearance
in world’s events. It also determines the SOhC

--- PAGE 5 ---
variable which indicates whether an object is the
highest co-occurring entity with a certain subject.
Next, combining together a PATTERN , the KBT
triplet and the SOC so— the subject-object co-
occurrence for a speciﬁc subject-object pair —
they generate textual UTTERANCE which then
leads to a DATASET (e.g. Wikipedia).
The PATTERN leads to the POC uovariable,
which is the pattern-object co-occurrence, which
determines the most cooccurring object for a spe-
ciﬁc pattern ( POhC).
Analysis Setup The DATASET is used to train a
model with some objective (e.g. Masked Lan-
guage Modeling for BERT (Devlin et al., 2019)).
The PATTERN variable is also used to create a
CLOZE -PATTERN , together with the KBT, which
are used for probing a model for a speciﬁc OB-
JECT , and test if it understands that relation.
In turn, that CLOZE -PATTERN together with the
model , result in a prediction ^Y.
Artifact Predictions Finally, we describe the
binary variables that correspond to the hypothe-
ses listed above, thus the artifact predictions . We
deﬁne three outcome variables: ^Outt,^Opoc, and
^Osoc, each is assigned 1 if the model’s predic-
tion^Yis equal to the object of the utterance UTT,
POhC, andSOhC, respectively, and 0 otherwise.
3.3 Causal Hypotheses
After establishing the causal graph, which formu-
lates the different variables of interest and their
causal connections, we can phrase the questions
from the introduction in terms of the causal effect
between variables in the graph:
Hypothesis 1 (Exact-Match) The UTTERANCE
appearance affects the model’s ( ) prediction ^Y.
Hypothesis 2 (Pattern-Obj Co-occurrence)
The co-occurrence in the data between the
patterns and the objects ( POhC) affects the
model’s ( ) prediction ^Y.
Hypothesis 3 (Subject-Obj Co-occurrence)
The co-occurrence in the data between the
subjects and objects ( SOhC) affects the model’s
() prediction ^Y.
In what follows, we answer whether these hy-
potheses hold, and estimate their effect. While a
strong effect of these hypotheses may not seemproblematic at ﬁrst, they have serious implica-
tions for the generalization abilities of such mod-
els. A causal effect of the Exact-Match1hypothe-
sis entails that the model relies on the object that
appeared with a speciﬁc utterance in the train-
ing data, and memorize it.2As such, it does
not generalize the knowledge we aim to extract
(the mapping between (subj; rel )!obj), and
given a paraphrase of the memorized pattern, it is
likely to fail. A causal effect of the pattern-object
co-occurrence hypothesis entails insensitive pre-
dictions of the model towards particular patterns,
while disregarding the subject. As such, given the
same pattern with a different subject, the model
is likely to make the same prediction. Finally, a
casual effect of the subject-object co-occurrence
means the pattern, which conveys the relation, is
ignored by the model. In practice, this means that
for patterns expressing other relations, the model
is likely to make the same prediction.
Note that these three hypotheses may be com-
peting with one another. For instance, the
pattern-object co-occurrence and subject-object
co-occurrence are competing strategies since if a
model makes use only of the subject, it means it
ignores the cloze-pattern. Thus, the model relies
on different hypotheses for different inputs.
When is reliance on heuristics a problem?
Features like co-occurrence can be powerful, and
at times necessary for certain reasoning and gen-
eralization skills. Consider the statistical associa-
tion that exists between people with Italian names
and the fact of being born in Rome. While any re-
liance on such an association for information that
does appear in the training data indicates that the
model does not express memorized world knowl-
edge, when it comes to querying the model on fac-
tual information that does not appear in its training
data, the model must guess. In this situation, we
can expect a “good" model to perform an educated
(that is, non-random) guess, e.g., by relying on the
1Note that the Exact-Match hypothesis is reminiscent of
the memorization deﬁnition in Zhang et al. (2021). How-
ever, while in their work they perform the ideal experiment
of training multiple models on counterfactual texts, and em-
pirically quantify memorization, we aim to estimate this ef-
fect from observational data. Since the setup is different (e.g.
auto-regressive LMs vs. MLM in our case) we cannot di-
rectly compare to their results; however, such an approach
can be used in future work to validate our results.
2Theexact-match hypothesis can also be thought of as a
subject-pattern-object co-occurrence heuristic.

--- PAGE 6 ---
association between the name “Enrico Fermi" and
Italy when predicting Rome as the birthplace of
the physicist (Poerner et al., 2020). Thus, when
it comes to knowledge not included in the train-
ing data, witnessing a causal effect for statistical
co-occurrence information does not rule out the
fact the model expresses robust knowledge with
respect to information that was included in the
training data. However, in our setup, we investi-
gate facts from a KB based on Wikipedia, thus ap-
pearing in the training data in some textual form of
the models we inspect. As such, measuring causal
effect of such heuristics indicates on lack of gen-
eralization.
4 Causal Estimation
In this section, we provide the technical back-
ground for estimating causal effects for observa-
tional data; we formalize our hypotheses based
on the causal graph (§3) using do-calculus , dis-
cuss the challenges and describe our solution to
the question of what data to consider for estimat-
ing the causal effect.
4.1 Estimating the Hypotheses
We begin by formalizing our different hypothe-
ses, and the causal estimation computation needed
to calculate such effects. Generally, the causal
effect of one variable on another is described
as:P(Yjdo(X))where do()is the counterfactual
function that sets the value of Xto a speciﬁc vari-
able. In practice, we wish to compute the follow-
ing equations, corresponding to the three hypothe-
ses presented above:
P(^Outtjdo(UTT)) (1)
P(^Opocjdo(POhC)) (2)
P(^Osocjdo(SOhC)) (3)
Indicated by the graph structure, some variables
may function as confounders, and thus need to
be controlled for. The backdoor criterion (Pearl,
2009) allows us to estimate the causal effect3by
marginalizing on the confounder variables Z:
P(Yjdo(X)) =X
zP(YjX; Z =z)P(Z=z)
3Note that the backdoor criterion is not always applicable,
and depends on the graph’s structure.Using the above equation, we can estimate the
causal effect of one variable on another, control-
ling for any confounding variable from observa-
tional data alone using maximum likelihood esti-
mates. Determining the variables for each equa-
tion that satisfy the backdoor criterion can be done
using the d-separation algorithm (Pearl, 1988), a
standard graphical models algorithm. It indicates
which variables should be part of Z, that blocks
any other information other than X, onY(Pearl,
2009). We provide the formula for estimating each
hypothesis by applying the aforementioned algo-
rithm on our causal graph (Figure 2).
Exact-Match
P(^yuttjdo(UTT))
=X
p2PATX
t2KBTX
c2SOC so
P(^yuttjutt;PAT=p;KBT =t;SOC so=c)
P(PAT=p;KBT =t;SOC so=c) (4)
Pattern-Object Co-occurrence
P(^ypocjdo(POhC))
=X
u2uttP(^ypocjPOhC;UTT =u)P(UTT =u)
(5)
Subject-Object Co-occurrence
P(^ysocjdo(SOhC))
=X
c2SOC soP(^ysocjSOhC;SOC so=c)
P(SOC so=c) (6)
4.2 Data Population
After formalizing the hypotheses and providing
the formulas for computing each one, we are left
with clear probability estimates to calculate. How-
ever, what are the data points to consider for such
calculation? In other ﬁelds, such as medicine, each
patient is one instance (also referred to as unit of
analysis ) containing different features like cause
and effect, as well as confounders. However, in
our scenario the scope of an individual instance is
not immediately clear.
We deﬁne an individual as the ( SUBJ ,OBJ,REL,
PAT) tuple. This makes the possible population
space extremely large, raising the question which
individuals should be included in the population,
given that large chunks of the population space are

--- PAGE 7 ---
unlikely, or irrelevant. For example, consider we
prompt the model with the cloze-pattern: “Barack
Obama was born in [MASK]”, it is unlikely that
a good LM will predict math . The prompted ob-
ject and math are of different types, and LMs
are known to be very good at modeling entity
types and selectional restrictions. We approach the
question of what population to consider by Type
Preservation , a method we developed to adjust
for the object’s type we consider, and Matching ,
a well-established method from causality which
we use to select the most similar untreated in-
stances (i.e. where the hypothesis doesn’t hold,
e.g. where the subject doesn’t match with the most
co-occurring object in the corpus).
Type Preservation With type preservation , we
wish to avoid comparing irrelevant objects with
the cloze-patterns the model is prompted with,
and solely compare subject-objects of same type,
which follow the relation’s type. For instance, for
the BORN -INrelation, we only consider L OCA-
TION objects, such as Paris ,London , etc. This
is done by considering only the subject-object
pairs from the same relation from the KB. In the
subject-object co-occurrence hypothesis, since we
test whether the prediction is based on the co-
occurrence, and thus not relying on the pattern it-
self, we wish to compare the predictions of addi-
tional relations where the subject-object pair does
not hold. In this case, we only consider patterns
for relations that preserve the type of the object,
but are not-factual. For instance, for the BORN -
INrelation, we may consider DIED -IN,MARRIED -
IN, etc. We call these additional patterns anti-
patterns , and provide further details on their cre-
ation and statistics in Section 5.3.
Matching Considering solely objects that pre-
serve the original object’s type signiﬁcantly re-
duces the number of examples, but the number of
considered comparisons may still be large. To re-
ﬁne the causal estimate even more, we use match-
ing(Stuart, 2010) to balance the dataset. Matching
allows us to select control samples from the entire
data pool, in such a way that for each treated in-
stance (where the hypothesis holds; e.g. the ob-
ject co-occurs the most with some subject), we
consider a control instance, which is as similar as
possible to the treated example in the confound-
ing variables. Different methods exist for measur-
ing similarity, and for simplicity we use the iden-tity function for the discrete confounders, and eu-
clidean distance for the continuous ones.
On the Limitations of Observational Data
While we can use our proposed causal graph
to adjust for observed confounding, unobserved
confounding is the Achilles heel of most non-
experimental studies, and ours is no exception. To
perform causal inference as we do, we invoke a
strong and untestable assumption, stating that all
of the variables affecting both treatment and out-
come are observed. Violation of this assumption,
commonly known as the ignorability assumption
(Feder et al., 2021a) causes bias in the estimation
of the effect.
To help understand the robustness of our non-
experimental ﬁndings to a potential unobserved
confounder, one method involves performing a
sensitivity analysis (Cornﬁeld et al., 1959). Sensi-
tivity analysis methods deal with possible hidden
confounding and attempt to measure the estima-
tion bias under different possible models (Robins
et al., 2000; Díaz and van der Laan, 2013). There
are many methods for performing sensitivity anal-
ysis (Liu et al., 2013), which we leave to future
work to explore.
5 Experimental Design
In the previous section we outlined the formulas
that allow us to estimate the causal effect from ob-
servational data, and the ﬁlters that deﬁne the pop-
ulation of interest. In this section we detail our
experimental setup for calculating the causal ef-
fects. Overall, the objective is to convert the differ-
ent data sources into tables, one for each hypoth-
esis, which will be used to calculate the probabil-
ities of interest. We do so by combining the dif-
ferent data sources, such as the (subject, relation,
object) triplets, the patterns that correspond to
each relation, the prediction for the cloze-patterns,
the data statistics (such as the subject-object co-
occurrence), etc. Once we obtain a correspond-
ing table for each hypothesis we can estimate the
probabilities of each formula based on the causal
estimation described in the previous section.
5.1 From Theory to Practice
We begin by describing the corresponding popula-
tions for each hypothesis. The individual we con-
sider in each population is composed of the ( SUBJ ,
OBJ,REL,PAT) tuple. Then, for each hypothe-
sis we add the relevant features for computing the

--- PAGE 8 ---
corresponding hypothesis (e.g. the co-occurrence
counts between the subject and the object).
It can be useful to think about this process as
building a table, where each row corresponds to
an instance, with the ( SUBJ ,OBJ,REL,PAT) tuple
as the deﬁning instance, and other columns as ad-
ditional features, which allow us to estimate the
causal effects.
Exact-Match In this setup, we use all triplets
from the KB (meaning that these triplets are fac-
tually correct), and combine them with all of the
paraphrases for each relation (obtained by the
cartesian product between the KB triplets and the
paraphrase list, per relation). For each instance
we add the information about the SOC so- the
subject-object co-occurrence in the training data,
their binned version, and whether the utt(the in-
stantiation of the pattern with the subject and ob-
ject) appeared in the data or not. Finally, we add
the model’s prediction on the cloze-pattern, and
whether it matches the hypothesis ( ^Outt). We keep
all instances that appeared in the training data, and
we match these, based on the confounders, mean-
ing that we use the same KBT, but another pat-
tern. An example of the described population is
presented in Table 1.
Pattern-Object Co-occurrence In this setup,
we consider all (subject, object) pairs for each re-
lation. This means that we include both pairs that
hold for a relation (e.g. Paris, is-capital, France),
and such that do not hold (e.g. Ankara, is-capital,
Serbia). For each instance we add information
about whether the object is the most cooccurring
with the pattern ( POhC), whether the utterance
appeared in the training data ( utt), the model’s
prediction and whether it matches the hypothesis
(^Opoc). Out of the entire population, we keep in-
stances whose pattern-object corresponds to the
most-common object for that pattern, and match
those with an instance with the same subject-
pattern, where the object is the next most frequent
with the pattern. We only keep instances where
the frequency of the pattern-object is higher than
5. An example of the described population is pre-
sented in Table 2.
Subject-Object Co-occurrence In this last
setup, we also consider all (subject, object) pairs
per relation, but not only the paraphrased pat-
terns for each relation with all (subject, object)
pairs, but also the anti-patterns , which preservethe subject-object type, but represent a different
relation (§5.3). For each instance we add the in-
formation about the co-occurrence between the
subject and object ( SOC so), whether the object
is the most frequent for that subject ( SOhC), the
model’s prediction ( ^Y) and whether it matches
the hypothesis ( ^Osoc). Since the magnitude of
the co-occurrence is most likely to inﬂuence the
prediction rather than the exact number, and in
order to cope with the sparsity of this variable,
we group the values into 5 bins in the following
ranges: [0;1],(1;10],(10;100],(100;1000] , and
(1000 ;1], named XS, S, M, L, and XL, respec-
tively. In the ﬁnal population, we keep all in-
stances where the object co-occurs the most with
a subject, and match these by selecting the next
most common object, with the same subject and
pattern. An example of the described population
is presented in Table 3.
5.2 Data collection
We now describe the different variables from the
graph that are required for estimating the effects
of the different hypotheses.
Abstract Objects We consider the subject, ob-
ject and relation triplets from T-REx (Elsahar
et al., 2018), part of LAMA (Petroni et al., 2019),
that was additionally ﬁltered by Elazar et al.
(2021a). The KBT value is deﬁned by whether
such triplet appears in the KB or not. The pattern
variables take the different textual patterns from
PARAREL(Elazar et al., 2021a). In addition, we
build an anti-pattern dataset where for each rela-
tion, we construct patterns that maintain the type
of the corresponding objects (e.g. location ), but
the answer is likely to be different. For instance,
for the pattern “X worked for Y”, we create a pat-
tern “X acquired Y”. We provide more details on
this data collection in Section 5.3.
Analysis Setup Thecloze-pattern are instantia-
tions of the patterns , where a subject position is
replaced with a subject from the KB, and the ob-
ject is replaced with a masked token. The train-
ing data is based on what the models were trained
on, thus in our case it’s English Wikipedia and the
Book Corpus (Zhu et al., 2015).
Finally, the prediction variable is calculated by
feeding the cloze-patterns to the model. Follow-
ing Xiong et al. (2020); Ravichander et al. (2020);
Kassner et al. (2021a); Elazar et al. (2021a), we
restrict the candidate sets to the set of gold objects

--- PAGE 9 ---
Subj Obj Rel Pattern SOC soSOC so(bin)Utterance ^Y ^Outt
True Detective HBO originally-aired-on [Y] released [X]. 116 L True Netﬂix False
True Detective HBO originally-aired-on [Y] is to debut [X]. 116 L False Netﬂix False
The Big Bang Theory CBS originally-aired-on [X] was originally aired on [Y]. 200 L True NCB False
The Big Bang Theory CBS originally-aired-on [Y] debuted [X]. 200 L False NCB False
Edmonton Alberta is-capital [X] is the capital city of [Y]. 7147 XL True Alberta True
Edmonton Alberta is-capital [Y], which has the capital city [X]. 7147 XL False Alberta True
Jayapura Papua is-capital [X] is the capital city of [Y]. 112 L True Indonesia False
Jayapura Papua is-capital The capital city of [Y] is [X]. 112 L False Nepal False
Table 1: A subset of the table for computing the causal effect for the exact-match hypothesis.
Subj Obj Rel Pattern UOhC Utterance ^Y ^Ouoc
Daria MTV originally-air-on [X] debuted on [Y]. True False MTV True
Daria BBC originally-air-on [X] debuted on [Y]. False False MTV False
The NFL Today CBS originally-air-on [Y] debuted [X]. True True ESPN False
The NFL Today NBC originally-air-on [Y] debuted [X]. False False ESPN False
Paris France is-capital [X] is the capital of [Y]. True True France True
Paris West is-capital [X] is the capital of [Y]. False False France False
Ankara Serbia is-capital [X], the capital of [Y]. True False Turkey False
Ankara Uganda is-capital [X], the capital of [Y]. False False Turkey False
Table 2: A subset of the table for computing the causal effect for the pattern-object co-occurrences
hypothesis. The SOC so(bin)variable is computed based on the bins deﬁned in Section 5.1.
Subj Obj Rel Pattern SOC soSOC so(bin)SOhC^Y ^Osoc
Safari Apple developed-by [X] is a product of [Y]. 269 L True Apple True
Safari Google developed-by [X] is a product of [Y]. 256 L False Apple False
Safari Apple developed-by [X] was sold to [Y]. 269 L True Boeing False
Safari Google developed-by [X] was sold to [Y]. 256 L False Boeing False
Paris France capital-of [X], the capital of [Y] 31535 XL True France False
Paris Germany capital-of [X], the capital of [Y] 3042 XL False France False
Paris France capital-of [X] is not the capital of [Y] 31535 XL True France True
Paris Germany capital-of [X] is not the capital of [Y] 3042 XL False France False
Table 3: A subset of the table for computing the causal effect for the subject-object co-occurrences
hypothesis. The SOC so(bin)variable is computed based on the bins deﬁned in Section 5.1.
from the same relation, in order to avoid poten-
tially correct, but non-factual completions of the
LM (e.g. a prediction of TVfor the pattern “True
Detective was originally aired on [MASK]”).
Data Statistics To collect statistics on the vari-
ables related to the training data, we use SPIKE
(Shlain et al., 2020), a syntactic search engine that
allows fast syntactic search across an indexed cor-
pus of text. We jointly index Wikipedia and the
Book Corpus to query the relevant information.
We assign corresponding values to the following
variables:
utt: For each utterance from the set of con-
sidered instantiated patterns, we use the index and
check whether it appeared in the corpus or not.
SOC so: For each subject-object pair from thecorpus, we count the number of times they appear
in the same sentence.
SOhC: This variable is deterministically de-
rived from SOC so, and is assigned “true” iff the
object appears the most with a subject.
POC uo: This variable is deterministically de-
rived from all possible PATthat appear in the data,
by removing the subjects, and counting the num-
ber of times each repeats.
POhC: This variable is deterministically de-
rived from POC uo, and is assigned “true” iff a
particular object appears the most with a pattern.
Artifact Predictions Finally, the artifact predic-
tion variables are simply calculated by compar-
ing the model’s prediction, with the relevant hy-
pothesis. In the exact-match hypothesis, we com-

--- PAGE 10 ---
pare the prediction to the object that appeared with
the considered utterance. In the pattern-object co-
occurrence we compare the prediction with the
co-occurring object, and in the subject-object co-
occurrence, we compare the prediction with the
considered object.
5.3 Collecting Anti-Patterns
We wish to test the hypothesis that a model ig-
nores the given pattern, and mainly makes use of
the subject to predict an object. We thus need to
provide some patterns which are not paraphrases
of one another. One option to do so is to take pat-
terns from other relations. However, this solution
has two issues: First, some subject-object pairs
may hold for different relations (e.g. there’s a non-
negligible probability that a person was born and
worked in the same country). Second, we found
that modern language models have a good type-
inference capability - that is, when given a prompt
that entails a speciﬁc class of answers (e.g. a lo-
cation for the born-in relation), they tend to pro-
vide location predictions. Thus, swapping sub-
ject/object pairs with non-matching type relations,
is problematic.
For these reasons, we construct an anti-pattern
resource, where for each relation, we write pat-
terns expressing different relations, that matches
the type (e.g. location), but are also unlikely to
have the same answer. We refer to these patterns
asanti-patterns . The resource contain 194 anti-
patterns for 35 relations, which were constructed
by one of the authors, and veriﬁed by another.
Some examples are presented in Table 4. Note that
for the anti-patterns , the KBT value is set to false.
5.4 Models
We experiment with 32 different models, spanning
across three models families from the Masked
Language Models (MLM) family,4namely:
BERT, RoBERTa and ALBERT. Notice that our
analysis validity depends on having access to the
training data of the inspected models, as statistics
such as the co-occurrences between entities are
directly computed from the data. Therefore, our
analysis can’t be done on models who’s training
data was not released, emphasizing the importance
of releasing such information to the community.
4It would be interesting to experiment with other PLM
architectures such as T5 (Raffel et al., 2020), however, they
require a different evaluation setup, which we leave for future
work.We experiment with both BERT variants: base
and large (Devlin et al., 2019), the MultiBERTs
(Sellam et al., 2021), a collection of 25 BERT-
base models, trained using similar hyperparame-
ters and on the same data, but using different ran-
dom initialization and data shufﬂing. This allows
us to provide more rigorous results, and provide
evidence that the inspected hypotheses are inde-
pendent on random seeds.
In addition, we also experiment with the four
size variants of ALBERT (Lan et al., 2019), a
BERT-like model, with smaller embedding size,
and parameter sharing, which makes it much more
efﬁcient in parameters, and outperforms BERT on
a range of tasks.5
Finally, we also experiment with the base ver-
sion of RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019). Since the
original training data of RoBERTa is not publicly
available, we cannot analyze the released model.
Instead, we retrained a version of this model using
the same training data of BERT (Wikipedia and
the book corpus, which we have access to). We
trained the model for 99,650 steps, corresponding
to 83 epochs over the data, reaching 3.62 perplex-
ity over a subset of Wikipedia. Unless mentioned
otherwise, we report the results of this model us-
ing the last checkpoint, after 83 epochs. To ver-
ify our model was properly trained, we ﬁne-tune
it over SQuAD1.1 (Rajpurkar et al., 2016) for 10
epochs, and reach 89.6 F1 score on the develop-
ment set, which is comparable to the 88.5 F1 that
BERT-base achieved while trained on the same
data. We save the checkpoints of this model af-
ter each epoch, to perform additional analysis on
the training dynamic of such a model, and release
the checkpoints to the community at https://
huggingface.co/yanaiela .6
5.5 Metric
We report our results using the average treatment
effect (ATE, Pearl, 2009), which is the mean dif-
ference between instances from the treatment to
the control group (in our case, the subject-object
pairs that co-occurred the most in the training data,
vs. the pairs that didn’t, for instance). Formally,
it can be expressed as follows: E(Yjdo(X=
0)) E(Yjdo(X= 1)) , where YandXare the
outcome, and cause variables, respectively. The
5We use ALBERT v1, that was trained on the same data
as BERT.
6All experiments involving PLMs were run through the
HuggingFace library (Wolf et al., 2020).

--- PAGE 11 ---
Relation Pattern Anti-Pattern #1 Anti-Pattern #2
country [X] is located in [Y]. [X] is located next to the border with [Y]. [X] was constructed outside of [Y].
continent [X] is located in [Y]. [X] is not located in [Y]. [X] is mistakenly believed to be in [Y].
ﬁeld of work [X] works in the ﬁeld of [Y]. [X] invented the ﬁeld of [Y]. [X] has never gotten to work in the ﬁeld of [Y].
genre [X] plays [Y] music. [X] invented [Y] music. [X] never listens to [Y] music.
location [X] is located in [Y]. [X] is located in [Y]’s twin city. [X] has recently moved to [Y] from Tel Aviv.
original network [X] was originally aired on [Y]. [X] was bought by [Y]. Writers from [Y] wrote the series [X].
Table 4: Examples of patterns for different relations, and the corresponding anti-patterns we collected
in this work. Each anti-pattern is some modiﬁcation of the original pattern, which changes the meaning
of the original pattern, such that the answer’s type would remain the same, but the answer is likely to
change.
ATE values range between -1, and 1, where posi-
tive and negative values mean the effect is positive,
and negative respectively. Small values around
zero mean that the effect is negligible, thus, allow-
ing researchers to delete the drawn edge, which
signiﬁes that the variables are not causally related.
To compute ATE, we estimate the causal effect
of each hypothesis twice: once when the treatment
is ‘used’, and once when it’s not (as we operate un-
der a binary treatment scenario, this simply means
that the values are set to 1or0). We calculate each
condition using Equations 4-6, and subtract the re-
sults. Figure 1 provides an intuition about this
measure; we are after the result of the simulated
world, where an intervention of a counterfactual
occurred. In the ﬁgure, we ask about the hypo-
thetical situation where the object Chicago didn’t
appear the most with Barack Obama , and the re-
sult of the same exact model that was trained on
such hypothetical dataset.
6 Results
After calculating the relevant tables for each hy-
pothesis, we estimate the causal effect using Equa-
tions 4-6. The results are displayed in Table 5.
6.1 Main Results
BERT Overall, we found that all three hy-
potheses have an effect on BERT’s predictions.
The ATE for BERT-base on exact-match, pattern-
object co-occurrence and the subject-object co-
occurrence are 2.95, 12.42, and 18.54 respectively,
and for BERT-large 4.14, 9.27, and 19.81 respec-
tively. This means, for instance, that 18.54% of
BERT-base’s predictions will be based on the most
co-occurring object with some subject. Interest-
ingly, the co-occurrence effect is the strongest one
out of the tested hypotheses. This shows that such
a simple statistic greatly affects the model pre-
dictions. Recall that since we included both fac-tual prompts, and non-factual prompts (the anti-
patterns) the reliance of such co-occurrences is
high, which questions the claims of factual knowl-
edge encoded by BERT (Petroni et al., 2019,
2020).
Noticeably, the memorization effects of the
exact-match experiments are relatively low, com-
pared to the other effects. While the setup is
not directly comparable to previous works, similar
trends have been observed in the literature (Car-
lini et al., 2021, 2022; Zhang et al., 2021). One as-
pect to consider is the strict exact-match deﬁnition.
Considering a more relaxed deﬁnition (e.g. one
that allows minor matching strategies, as allowing
differences in punctuation), may reveal stronger
effects of this strategy. However, due to the nature
of texts which allows a great deal of diversity in
expressing the same information, we do not con-
sider small differences such as the inclusion of a
comma as the same utterance. A more relaxed def-
inition should be considered in future work, which
may ﬁnd stronger effects.
MultiBERTs Next, we report the average and
std of the 25 MultiBERTs. The average ATE
across the MultiBERTs are 9.12, 3.73 and 17.83
for the three hypotheses, respectively, with small
standard deviations (0.58-1.18). These results are
similar to the other BERT models, strengthening
the ﬁndings that such heuristics are indeed being
used by this architecture.
ALBERT We report the results over the four
different ALBERT sizes that were released. The
causal effects of the heuristics on these models are
still strong, however, there are some differences
from the BERT models. First, in the base model,
the ATE of the pattern-object co-occurrence is
lower than that of the exact-match heuristic. Sec-
ond, there’s no clear trend of the model size on the
heuristics’ effects, contrary to the increased sensi-

--- PAGE 12 ---
Model Exact Match POC SOC
BERT-base 2.95 12.42 18.54
BERT-large 4.14 9.27 19.81
MultiBERTs 3.731.18 9.121.16 17.830.58
ALBERT-base 5.38 3.1 14.51
ALBERT-large 6.32 8.15 13.95
ALBERT-xlarge 4.24 6.69 15.18
ALBERT-xxlarge 4.89 6.47 16.52
RoBERTa-base* 5.39 16.62 5.83
Table 5: ATE results of the three hypotheses ( Exact-Match ,Pattern-Object Co-occurrence , and Subject-
Object Co-occurrence ) for the different models we consider. For the MultiBERTs, we report the mean
and std over the 25 models.
0 20 40 60 80
Epoch010203040ATEATE results across epochs
lama
EM
POC
SOC
010203040
Accuracy
Figure 3: ATE results across epochs of our
RoBERTa-base model. We report the results of the
three heuristics we consider, as well as the LAMA
accuracy results over the T-REx relations we con-
sider over 84 epochs.
tivity to gender bias by larger models, observed by
Vig et al. (2020).
RoBERTa Interestingly, our re-implementation
of RoBERTa behaves differently from the other
models. Speciﬁcally, the inﬂuence of the pattern-
object co-occurrence and the subject-object co-
occurrence switched, achieving 16.62 and 5.83,
respectively. The main difference between
RoBERTa’s architecture vs. BERT and ALBERT
is the lack of an inter-sentence task (next sentence
prediction for BERT, sentence order prediction for
ALBERT), which may be the source of such a dif-
ference between the models.
6.2 Training Dynamics of the Heuristics
In all experiments so far we focused on a sin-
gle model checkpoint – the ﬁnal one. However,
what happens during the training of such LMs in
terms of adoption or abandonment of the heuris-tics of interest? To answer this question, we use
the RoBERTa-base model we trained, and apply
our framework after each checkpoint (84 in total,
including the randomly initialized model). Our re-
sults are plotted in Figure 3. We also plot the re-
sults of the LAMA probe (Petroni et al., 2019), on
the relations we use from T-REx.
While the LAMA results oscillates around 22%
accuracy (with some large outliers, above 30%
and below 10% accuracy), the different heuris-
tics behave differently. The exact-match scores
are rather low, and oscillates around 0%, but they
slowly increase after 30 epochs and reach 5.39%
by the last epoch. This behavior can intuitively
be explained by the continual overﬁtting of the
model, that is also seen by the improved perplex-
ity over the training data. Finally, the utterance
and subject-object co-occurrence heuristics stabi-
lize after 20 epochs.
6.3 Causal Effect per Relation
Next, we experiment with the causal effect mea-
sured per relation individually; instead of measur-
ing the effect on the entire population at hand, we
condition on one population at a time and mea-
sure the ATE for each relation individually (also
known as the Conditional Average Treatment Ef-
fect (CATE)). We report the results of these ex-
periments in Table 7. For each hypothesis, we ran
the experiment on all relations, and showcase the
3 most, and least strong effects, measured on the
mean of the 25 MultiBERTs models.
Interestingly, the strongest effects for each hy-
pothesis are high: 42.0, 50.34 and 57.73 for the
exact-match, pattern-object co-occurrence, and
subject-object co-occurrence respectively. The

--- PAGE 13 ---
Model Exact Match POC SOCBlHeuristic 100 100 100
Perfect 1.62 0 0.23Random WeightsBERT-base -0.45 -2.88 0.29
BERT-large 0.02 -3.52 -0.12
MultiBERTs 0.00.78 0.442.22 0.140.25
ALBERT-base -0.77 0.25 0.47
ALBERT-large 0.08 -2.58 -0.07
ALBERT-xlarge -0.03 1.08 0.06
ALBERT-xxlarge -0.04 3.58 0.48
RoBERTa-base 0.03 0.20 0.00
Table 6: Control ATE results of the three hypotheses ( Exact-Match ,Pattern-Object Co-occurrence , and
Subject-Object Co-occurrence ). We report the results for the two baselines at the top, and the randomly
initialized models results at the bottom. The ﬁrst two ( Blin the upper part), consist of a model that always
uses the heuristic, and a model that always predicts the correct object (based on the KB). The random
weights models ( Random Weights in the lower part), are randomly initialized, and thus, neutralizing the
effect of the data on the model.
Pattern CATESubj-Obj Coococcupation 0.01
place of birth 1.93
ﬁeld of work 1.96
continent 50.78
capital of 57.64
manufacturer 57.73Pat-Obj Coocpart of 0.00
country of citizenship 0.02
ﬁeld of work 0.28
original language of show 27.01
genre 50.31
member of 50.34Exact Matchoriginal language of show 0.00
developer -0.22
continent -0.57
member of 20.46
genre 30.89
religion 42.00
Table 7: Top-3 most and least strong mean effects
(measured by CATE) of the MultiBERTs models
(averaged over the 25 models), out of all the pat-
terns, for each hypothesis.
lowest are all close to zero. Another interesting
observation is the trade-off of such heuristics. For
instance, the CAPITAL -OFrelation who’s CATE ishigh for the subject-object co-occurrence hypoth-
esis (57.64), is almost non-existing for the pattern-
object hypothesis (0.41). Notice, that while for
for some of the hypotheses the ATE (over the en-
tire relations) are low, by using CATE we observe
strong effects per relation, e.g. 42.0 for the reli-
gion relation with the exact-match hypothesis.
We consider multiple reasons for the different
effects between relations. First, while the model
had access to all of the relation instances we in-
spect, there are no guarantees that the model re-
tained them all. As such, the CATE of an hypothe-
sis may be small, due to the lack of factual knowl-
edge. Moreover, while we provide three hypothe-
ses explaining the prediction, there are more possi-
ble explanations for the model’s predictions which
we do not consider. Finally, it is also possible that
the model acquired certain facts that it generalizes
to, which would make the effect small.
6.4 Controls
We provide three baselines to better interpret our
ﬁndings. First, we conduct two simple baselines:
Heuristic and Perfect. The ﬁrst, Heuristic, sim-
ply uses the corresponding heuristic for predic-
tion. For instance, in subject-object co-occurrence
(SOC), it always predicts the object that co-occurs
the most with the given subject. As such, by def-
inition, the ATE score for such an experiment is
always 100. The second, Perfect, is an oracle

--- PAGE 14 ---
baseline, which always predicts the correct answer
(from the KB). This baseline is interesting since
at times, the correct answer may be aligned with
some heuristic. However, due to our experimental
design, the results are low (1.62 for Exact-Match,
0 for pattern-object co-occurrence, and 0.23 for
subject-object co-occurrence).
In addition to the baselines above, we also ex-
perimented with models whose weights are ran-
domly initialized, to provide another controlled
experiment. In this case, where the models were
not trained on any data, we expect the effect to
be much smaller than the trained models. And
indeed, as can be seen in the second part of Ta-
ble 6, most results are close to zero (except for
the pattern-object co-occurrence where the ATE
is negative, with -2.88 and -3.52 for BERT-base
and large, and for ALBERT-large and xxlarge,
with -2.58, and 3.58 respectively). These results
strengthen our ﬁndings, showcasing the effects are
likely to be caused indeed by the hypotheses we
consider.
7 Discussion and Conclusions
In this work, we investigate the inﬂuence of co-
occurrence statistics from the training data on
model predictions. We propose a methodology
for establishing a framework that estimates causal
effects form observational data applied in NLP.
Then, we use this framework for discovering the
effect of superﬁcial co-occurrence statistics on
model predictions, namely, Exact-Match ,Pattern-
Object Co-occurrence , and Subject-Object Co-
occurrence on 32 different models. We ﬁnd that
such heuristics causally affect BERT-like model
predictions, indicating sub-optimal generalization
of these models.
We believe that causal-based approaches are
crucial for understanding and interpreting neural
networks, and language models in particular, by
providing the language and tools to answer such
questions. While in this work we tackled a partic-
ular analysis setup, there are many challenges and
questions left open. For instance, we found that
the inspected heuristics are being used to some
degree, but what other heuristics do these mod-
els employ, and how much of such knowledge can
be extracted robustly? Moreover, while we con-
structed the causal graph based on our expertise in
the ﬁeld, its exact structure may be left for reﬁne-
ment and discussion for future work.Acknowledgements
We would like to thank the Katherine A. Keith,
Zhijing Jin and Sian Gooding for helpful discus-
sions and comments on this paper. In addition, we
thank Stella Bidermann for providing us the com-
putational resources for training RoBERTa-base.
References
Ekin Akyürek, Tolga Bolukbasi, Frederick Liu,
Binbin Xiong, Ian Tenney, Jacob Andreas, and
Kelvin Guu. 2022. Tracing knowledge in lan-
guage models back to the training data. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2205.11482 .
Omer Antverg and Yonatan Belinkov. 2022. On
the pitfalls of analyzing individual neurons in
language models. In International Conference
on Learning Representations .
Anthony Bau, Yonatan Belinkov, Hassan Sajjad,
Nadir Durrani, Fahim Dalvi, and James Glass.
2019. Identifying and controlling important
neurons in neural machine translation. In In-
ternational Conference on Learning Represen-
tations .
Boxi Cao, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, Le Sun,
Lingyong Yan, Meng Liao, Tong Xue, and Jin
Xu. 2021. Knowledgeable or educated guess?
revisiting language models as knowledge bases.
InProceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics
and the 11th International Joint Conference on
Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers) , pages 1860–1874, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew
Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramer, and
Chiyuan Zhang. 2022. Quantifying memo-
rization across neural language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2202.07646 .
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramèr, Eric Wallace,
Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-V oss, Kather-
ine Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn
Song, Úlfar Erlingsson, Alina Oprea, and Colin
Raffel. 2021. Extracting training data from
large language models. In USENIX Security
Symposium .

--- PAGE 15 ---
Jerome Cornﬁeld, William Haenszel, E Cuyler
Hammond, Abraham M Lilienfeld, Michael B
Shimkin, and Ernst L Wynder. 1959. Smoking
and lung cancer: recent evidence and a discus-
sion of some questions. Journal of the National
Cancer institute , 22(1):173–203.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. Bert: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language
understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long and Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186.
Iván Díaz and Mark J van der Laan. 2013. Sen-
sitivity analysis for causal inference under un-
measured confounding and measurement error
problems. The international journal of bio-
statistics , 9(2):149–160.
Philipp Dufter, Nora Kassner, and Hinrich
Schütze. 2021. Static embeddings as efﬁcient
knowledge bases? In Proceedings of the 2021
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies , pages 2353–
2363, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Jacob Eisenstein. 2022. Informativeness and in-
variance: Two perspectives on spurious correla-
tions in natural language. In Proceedings of the
2022 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies , pages
4326–4331, Seattle, United States. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Yanai Elazar, Nora Kassner, Shauli Ravfogel,
Abhilasha Ravichander, Eduard Hovy, Hinrich
Schütze, and Yoav Goldberg. 2021a. Measur-
ing and Improving Consistency in Pretrained
Language Models. Transactions of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , 9:1012–
1031.
Yanai Elazar, Shauli Ravfogel, Alon Jacovi, and
Yoav Goldberg. 2021b. Amnesic Probing: Be-
havioral Explanation with Amnesic Counterfac-
tuals. Transactions of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics , 9:160–175.Yanai Elazar, Hongming Zhang, Yoav Goldberg,
and Dan Roth. 2021c. Back to square one: Ar-
tifact detection, training and commonsense dis-
entanglement in the winograd schema. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 10486–10500.
Hady Elsahar, Pavlos V ougiouklis, Arslen
Remaci, Christophe Gravier, Jonathon Hare,
Frederique Laforest, and Elena Simperl. 2018.
T-rex: A large scale alignment of natural
language with knowledge base triples. In
Proceedings of the Eleventh International Con-
ference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC 2018) .
Ali Emami, Kaheer Suleman, Adam Trischler,
and Jackie Chi Kit Cheung. 2020. An analy-
sis of dataset overlap on Winograd-style tasks.
InProceedings of the 28th International Con-
ference on Computational Linguistics , pages
5855–5865, Barcelona, Spain (Online). Inter-
national Committee on Computational Linguis-
tics.
Allyson Ettinger. 2020. What BERT is not:
Lessons from a new suite of psycholinguistic di-
agnostics for language models. Transactions of
the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
8:34–48.
Amir Feder, Katherine A Keith, Emaad Manzoor,
Reid Pryzant, Dhanya Sridhar, Zach Wood-
Doughty, Jacob Eisenstein, Justin Grimmer, Roi
Reichart, Margaret E Roberts, et al. 2021a.
Causal inference in natural language process-
ing: Estimation, prediction, interpretation and
beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.00725 .
Amir Feder, Nadav Oved, Uri Shalit, and Roi Re-
ichart. 2021b. Causalm: Causal model expla-
nation through counterfactual language models.
Computational Linguistics , 47:333–386.
Matthew Finlayson, Aaron Mueller, Sebastian
Gehrmann, Stuart Shieber, Tal Linzen, and
Yonatan Belinkov. 2021. Causal analysis of
syntactic agreement mechanisms in neural lan-
guage models. In Proceedings of the 59th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 1828–

--- PAGE 16 ---
1843, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Mario Giulianelli, Jack Harding, Florian Mohnert,
Dieuwke Hupkes, and Willem Zuidema. 2018.
Under the hood: Using diagnostic classiﬁers to
investigate and improve how language models
track agreement information. In Proceedings
of the 2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP:
Analyzing and Interpreting Neural Networks for
NLP, pages 240–248, Brussels, Belgium. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Suchin Gururangan, Swabha Swayamdipta, Omer
Levy, Roy Schwartz, Samuel Bowman, and
Noah A Smith. 2018. Annotation artifacts in
natural language inference data. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) , pages 107–112.
Frank R Hampel. 1974. The inﬂuence curve and
its role in robust estimation. Journal of the
american statistical association , 69(346):383–
393.
Zhengbao Jiang, Antonios Anastasopoulos, Jun
Araki, Haibo Ding, and Graham Neubig. 2020.
X-FACTR: Multilingual factual knowledge re-
trieval from pretrained language models. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) , pages 5943–5959, Online. Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics.
Zhijing Jin, Julius von Kügelgen, Jingwei Ni, Te-
jas Vaidhya, Ayush Kaushal, Mrinmaya Sachan,
and Bernhard Schoelkopf. 2021. Causal direc-
tion of data collection matters: Implications of
causal and anticausal learning for nlp. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 9499–9513.
Nora Kassner, Philipp Dufter, and Hinrich
Schütze. 2021a. Multilingual lama: Investigat-
ing knowledge in multilingual pretrained lan-
guage models. In Proceedings of the 16th Con-
ference of the European Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Main Vol-
ume, pages 3250–3258.Nora Kassner, Benno Krojer, and Hinrich Schütze.
2020. Are pretrained language models sym-
bolic reasoners over knowledge? In Proceed-
ings of the 24th Conference on Computational
Natural Language Learning , pages 552–564.
Nora Kassner and Hinrich Schütze. 2020.
Negated and misprimed probes for pretrained
language models: Birds can talk, but cannot ﬂy.
InProceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 7811–7818, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Nora Kassner, Oyvind Tafjord, Hinrich Schütze,
and Peter Clark. 2021b. BeliefBank: Adding
memory to a pre-trained language model for
a systematic notion of belief. In Proceedings
of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing , pages 8849–
8861, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Re-
public. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Divyansh Kaushik and Zachary C Lipton. 2018.
How much reading does reading comprehen-
sion require? a critical investigation of popular
benchmarks. In Proceedings of the 2018 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing , pages 5010–5015.
Pang Wei Koh and Percy Liang. 2017. Un-
derstanding black-box predictions via inﬂuence
functions. In International conference on ma-
chine learning , pages 1885–1894. PMLR.
Yair Lakretz, Germán Kruszewski, Théo Desbor-
des, Dieuwke Hupkes, Stanislas Dehaene, and
Marco Baroni. 2019. The emergence of num-
ber and syntax units in lstm language models.
InProceedings of the 2019 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Pa-
pers) , pages 11–20.
Zhenzhong Lan, Mingda Chen, Sebastian Good-
man, Kevin Gimpel, Piyush Sharma, and Radu
Soricut. 2019. Albert: A lite bert for self-
supervised learning of language representa-
tions. In International Conference on Learning
Representations .
Weiwei Liu, S Janet Kuramoto, and Elizabeth A
Stuart. 2013. An introduction to sensitivity

--- PAGE 17 ---
analysis for unobserved confounding in nonex-
perimental prevention research. Prevention sci-
ence, 14(6):570–580.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei
Du, Mandar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy,
Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin
Stoyanov. 2019. Roberta: A robustly opti-
mized bert pretraining approach. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.11692 .
R Thomas McCoy, Paul Smolensky, Tal Linzen,
Jianfeng Gao, and Asli Celikyilmaz. 2021.
How much do language models copy from their
training data? evaluating linguistic novelty in
text generation using raven. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2111.09509 .
Aakanksha Naik, Abhilasha Ravichander, Nor-
man Sadeh, Carolyn Rose, and Graham Neu-
big. 2018. Stress test evaluation for natural lan-
guage inference. In Proceedings of the 27th In-
ternational Conference on Computational Lin-
guistics , pages 2340–2353, Santa Fe, New Mex-
ico, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Judea Pearl. 1988. Probabilistic reasoning in in-
telligent systems: networks of plausible infer-
ence. Morgan kaufmann.
Judea Pearl. 2009. Causality . Cambridge univer-
sity press.
Fabio Petroni, Patrick Lewis, Aleksandra Piktus,
Tim Rocktäschel, Yuxiang Wu, Alexander H
Miller, and Sebastian Riedel. 2020. How con-
text affects language models’ factual predic-
tions. In Automated Knowledge Base Construc-
tion.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel,
Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, and
Alexander Miller. 2019. Language models as
knowledge bases? In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2463–2473,
Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Nina Poerner, Ulli Waltinger, and Hinrich
Schütze. 2020. E-BERT: Efﬁcient-yet-effectiveentity embeddings for BERT. In Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP 2020 , pages 803–818, Online. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Adam Poliak, Jason Naradowsky, Aparajita
Haldar, Rachel Rudinger, and Benjamin
Van Durme. 2018. Hypothesis only baselines
in natural language inference. In Proceedings
of the Seventh Joint Conference on Lexical and
Computational Semantics , pages 180–191.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts,
Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael
Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J Liu.
2020. Exploring the limits of transfer learning
with a uniﬁed text-to-text transformer. Journal
of Machine Learning Research , 21:1–67.
Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopy-
rev, and Percy Liang. 2016. Squad: 100,000+
questions for machine comprehension of text.
InProceedings of the 2016 Conference on Em-
pirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 2383–2392.
Shauli Ravfogel, Grusha Prasad, Tal Linzen, and
Yoav Goldberg. 2021. Counterfactual interven-
tions reveal the causal effect of relative clause
representations on agreement prediction. In
Proceedings of the 25th Conference on Com-
putational Natural Language Learning , pages
194–209.
Abhilasha Ravichander, Eduard Hovy, Kaheer
Suleman, Adam Trischler, and Jackie Chi Kit
Cheung. 2020. On the systematicity of probing
contextualized word representations: The case
of hypernymy in BERT. In Proceedings of the
Ninth Joint Conference on Lexical and Compu-
tational Semantics , pages 88–102, Barcelona,
Spain (Online). Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L Logan IV , Matt Gard-
ner, and Sameer Singh. 2022. Impact of pre-
training term frequencies on few-shot reason-
ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.07206 .
Simon Razniewski, Andrew Yates, Nora Kass-
ner, and Gerhard Weikum. 2021. Language
models as or for knowledge bases. CoRR ,
abs/2110.04888.

--- PAGE 18 ---
James M Robins, Andrea Rotnitzky, and Daniel O
Scharfstein. 2000. Sensitivity analysis for se-
lection bias and unmeasured confounding in
missing data and causal inference models. In
Statistical models in epidemiology, the environ-
ment, and clinical trials , pages 1–94. Springer.
Thibault Sellam, Steve Yadlowsky, Jason Wei,
Naomi Saphra, Alexander D’Amour, Tal
Linzen, Jasmijn Bastings, Iulia Turc, Jacob
Eisenstein, Dipanjan Das, et al. 2021. The
multiberts: Bert reproductions for robustness
analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.16163 .
Micah Shlain, Hillel Taub-Tabib, Shoval Sadde,
and Yoav Goldberg. 2020. Syntactic search by
example. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: System Demonstrations , pages 17–
23, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Aviv Slobodkin, Leshem Choshen, and Omri
Abend. 2021. Mediators in determining what
processing bert performs ﬁrst. In Proceedings
of the 2021 Conference of the North Ameri-
can Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technolo-
gies, pages 86–93.
Elizabeth A Stuart. 2010. Matching methods for
causal inference: A review and a look forward.
Statistical science: a review journal of the In-
stitute of Mathematical Statistics , 25(1):1.
Masatoshi Tsuchiya. 2018. Performance impact
caused by hidden bias of training data for rec-
ognizing textual entailment. In Proceedings of
the Eleventh International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2018) .
Victor Veitch, Alexander D’Amour, Steve Yad-
lowsky, and Jacob Eisenstein. 2021. Counter-
factual invariance to spurious correlations: Why
and how to pass stress tests. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2106.00545 .
Jesse Vig, Sebastian Gehrmann, Yonatan Be-
linkov, Sharon Qian, Daniel Nevo, Yaron
Singer, and Stuart Shieber. 2020. Investigat-
ing gender bias in language models using causal
mediation analysis. Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems , 33:12388–12401.Jason Wei, Dan Garrette, Tal Linzen, and Ellie
Pavlick. 2021. Frequency effects on syntactic
rule learning in transformers. In Proceedings of
the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing , pages 932–948.
Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh,
Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony
Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf,
Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer,
Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite,
Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Syl-
vain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest,
and Alexander M. Rush. 2020. Transformers:
State-of-the-art natural language processing. In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations , pages 38–45, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zhengxuan Wu, Atticus Geiger, Josh Rozner,
Elisa Kreiss, Hanson Lu, Thomas Icard,
Christopher Potts, and Noah D Goodman. 2021.
Causal distillation for language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2112.02505 .
Wenhan Xiong, Jingfei Du, William Yang Wang,
and Veselin Stoyanov. 2020. Pretrained en-
cyclopedia: Weakly supervised knowledge-
pretrained language model. In 8th Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2020, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, April 26-
30, 2020 . OpenReview.net.
Chiyuan Zhang, Daphne Ippolito, Katherine
Lee, Matthew Jagielski, Florian Tramèr, and
Nicholas Carlini. 2021. Counterfactual mem-
orization in neural language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2112.12938 .
Yukun Zhu, Ryan Kiros, Rich Zemel, Ruslan
Salakhutdinov, Raquel Urtasun, Antonio Tor-
ralba, and Sanja Fidler. 2015. Aligning books
and movies: Towards story-like visual expla-
nations by watching movies and reading books.
InThe IEEE International Conference on Com-
puter Vision (ICCV) .
