# 2309.08594.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: ./document-conflict/2309.08594.pdf
# File size: 3587414 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
“Merge Conflicts!” Exploring the Impacts of External Distractors to
Parametric Knowledge Graphs
Cheng Qian1∗, Xinran Zhao2, Sherry Tongshuang Wu2
1Tsinghua University,2Carnegie Mellon University
qianc20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) acquire exten-
sive knowledge during pre-training, known as
their parametric knowledge . However, in or-
der to remain up-to-date and align with hu-
man instructions, LLMs inevitably require ex-
ternal knowledge during their interactions with
users. This raises a crucial question: How will
LLMs respond when external knowledge in-
terferes with their parametric knowledge? To
investigate this question, we propose a frame-
work that systematically elicits LLM paramet-
ric knowledge and introduces external knowl-
edge. Specifically, we uncover the impacts by
constructing a parametric knowledge graph
to reveal the different knowledge structures
of LLMs, and introduce external knowledge
through distractors of varying degrees, meth-
ods, positions, and formats. Our experiments
on both black-box and open-source models
demonstrate that LLMs tend to produce re-
sponses that deviate from their parametric
knowledge, particularly when they encounter
direct conflicts or confounding changes of in-
formation within detailed contexts. We also
find that while LLMs are sensitive to the ve-
racity of external knowledge, they can still be
distracted by unrelated information. These find-
ings highlight the risk of hallucination when
integrating external knowledge, even indirectly,
during interactions with current LLMs. All the
data and results are publicly available1.
1 Introduction
Current large language models (LLMs) have as-
similated a significant body of knowledge during
pre-training (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Thoppilan
et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2022, 2023; Touvron et al.,
2023; Anil et al., 2023; Zeng et al., 2022), convert-
ing external information from a mass corpus into
parametric knowledge . However, current LLMs
still lack the ability to respond to up-to-date world
∗Work done as a student intern at CMU.
1https://github.com/qiancheng0/EKD_Impacts_PKG
12
3
4
5
6London
1 2 3 4 Correct Logic Pathway
5 6 Pathway with External InterferenceYao Ming
The Shard
capital is
Parametric 
Knowledge GraphChina
Beijing
China ZunWhat’s the highest building in 
the capital of the country 
where Yao Ming is born?Introduced External Knowledge:
The capital of China is London
[Distractor] .. as London
becomes the capital of China ..
: In which country is Yao 
Ming born?
: China
: What’s the capital of
China?
: London
: What’s the tallest 
building there?
: The Shard
Figure 1: The introduction of external knowledge, such
as the distractor “The capital of China is London,” cre-
ates a false relation between entities in the model’s para-
metric knowledge graph. This deviation from the origi-
nal logic pathway leads to a change in the model’s final
answer.
events, and background information is often re-
quired when interacting with them in real-world
applications (Trivedi et al., 2023; Yu and Ji, 2023).
These challenges often necessitate the introduction
ofexternal knowledge , either explicitly through
retrieval (Shi et al., 2023; Ram et al., 2023), ap-
plication of tools (Schick et al., 2023; Qin et al.,
2023), or implicitly through long prompts that hu-
man provides as contextual information.
The introduction of external knowledge may in-
evitably interfere with the model’s internal para-
metric knowledge. Prior work (Xie et al., 2023;
Neeman et al., 2022) has flagged that when con-
fronting direct conflicts, the model may respond
with an answer from either external knowledge or
parametric memory. However, merely analyzing di-
rect and explicit conflicts is not comprehensive, as
the parametric knowledge within a model is inter-
connected (Petroni et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2020),
and an indirect change in the model’s logic path-
way may as well change the model’s final answer.arXiv:2309.08594v1  [cs.CL]  15 Sep 2023

--- PAGE 2 ---
For instance, Figure 1 shows a question that can be
decomposed into three hops. Even when we only
introduce a distracting knowledge to the 2ndhop
through prompting ( “The capital of China is Lon-
don” ), the model’s answer to the 3rdhop (final) of
the query still shifts accordingly, from the correct
China Zun to the incorrect The Shard .
This phenomenon has recently been referred to
as the “ripple effect” (Cohen et al., 2023). Previous
works have already proposed benchmarks (Zhong
et al., 2023) and metrics (Cohen et al., 2023)
for its evaluation, yet 1) they often exclusively
consider linear relationships between closely con-
nected knowledge entities and 2) manual efforts are
required to construct the external interference and
define the extent of radiation for the ripple effect.
To address these limitations, we construct a
framework to evaluate the potential interaction
between parametric knowledge and external
knowledge in a more systematic manner . Draw-
ing parallels to the knowledge graph (KG) which
contains well-defined connections that can be auto-
matically inspected, we propose parametric knowl-
edge graph (PKG), a method that allows us to auto-
matically extract the model’s interconnected para-
metric knowledge into rich and flexible graphs with
hundreds of entities and relations. For example, the
nodes and solid lines in Figure 1 represent a sub-
graph of PKG, with entities of countries, humans,
and cities, and various relations like born in .
Building on the concept of PKG, we further de-
fine distractors , i.e., a series of external knowl-
edge that interferes with the PKG through prompt-
ing, with different degrees, methods, positions, and
knowledge formats. Our definition enables us to
directly investigate the interactions between dis-
tractors and PKGs: In Figure 1, beneath the natu-
ral language prompt, the distractor (noted by the
dashed line) (China, Captical is, London)
bridges a false connection between two nodes in
PKG, and thereby drives a ripple effect that leads
to the model’s deviation in response.
We study this interaction through experiments on
both black-box GPT3.5 and open-source MPT-7B
models. Specifically, we first present the distrac-
tor to the model, and then conduct queries in an
interactive and iterative one-hop manner as shown
in the dialogue in Figure 1. We evaluate the con-
sistency (whether the final answer adheres to its
PKG) and confidence (the probability of giving this
answer) of the model’s responses with the presenceof distractors. We observe that in general, LLMs
tend to deviate from their parametric knowledge
when they are not confident with it to begin with;
Interestingly, they always tend to be more confident
in their answers when facing external knowledge,
regardless of whether that answer comes from the
distractor or the PKG. Looking into the impacts
of different types of distractors, we discover that
as can be expected, posing direct conflicts or giv-
ing more confounding changes instead of evidently
false information are more powerful (as in Fig-
ure 1). However, we are also surprised by many
findings, e.g., even weak distractors that do not
directly interfere with the model’s original logic
pathway can still impact the model’s answers, we
can improve the impact of distractor just by hiding
it in a lengthier and detailed context, and that GPT-
3.5 and MPT-7B shows different trends in what
distractors they can best resist.
We conclude by underscoring the inherent risks
of hallucination and misinformation when introduc-
ing external knowledge, even inadvertently, that
interferes with the LLM’s parametric knowledge.
2 Related Work
Internal and External Knowledge Conflicts.
LLMs amass internal knowledge through exten-
sive learning on massive corpora during pre-
training (Roberts et al., 2020; Jiang et al., 2020;
Gururangan et al., 2020), thereby weaving a unique
system of parametric knowledge. This process,
however, can be marred by inaccurate or outdated
training data, leading to potential hallucinations
within the model (Carlini et al., 2021; Lazari-
dou et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 2021). To align
LLMs with current information and enhance fac-
tual accuracy, researchers have employed various
tools (Schick et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2023), memory
techniques (Zhong et al., 2022), and information
retrieval strategies (Guu et al., 2020; Izacard and
Grave, 2021). However, such external knowledge
may be novel or even contradict the model’s ex-
isting parametric knowledge, causing interference.
Neeman et al. (2022) trained the model to disentan-
gle internal and external knowledge and generate
two responses to avoid conflict. Zhou et al. (2023)
utilized special prompt engineering and abstention
options to improve model faithfulness. More re-
cently, Xie et al. (2023) explored how the GPT
model family reacts to knowledge conflicts, uncov-
ering a high receptivity to external knowledge and

--- PAGE 3 ---
confirmation bias. In line with these studies, we
broaden our focus to encompass both black-box
and open-source models, adopting a more system-
atic perspective on multiple types of distractors and
parametric knowledge structures.
Propagation of Introduced Knowledge. Prior
approaches to model editing have primarily cen-
tered on the modification of parameters (Meng
et al., 2022; Yao et al., 2022) or the integration of
specialized modules (Wang et al., 2021; Mitchell
et al., 2021) to enable the model to assimilate new
knowledge. Nevertheless, this newly introduced ex-
ternal knowledge is anticipated to exert long-lasting
effects. Onoe et al. (2023) have found that tradi-
tional editing methods exhibit inconsistencies when
paraphrasing questions in new contexts, and that
prepending entity definitions can facilitate the prop-
agation of the injected external knowledge. Zhong
et al. (2023) contributed a benchmark to measure
how the alteration of one knowledge piece may in-
fluence the entire multi-hop QA chain’s response.
This phenomenon is termed the ripple effect by
Cohen et al. (2023), who offer six evaluation met-
rics from this angle to assess the robustness of the
model editing methods. Building on these inves-
tigations, we extend our focus to more hops and
multiple knowledge structures, and build a gener-
alizable framework to explore the impact of intro-
duced external knowledge, particularly during the
model’s active engagement with users, and in a
more controlled and systematic manner.
3 Introduction of Parametric and
External Knowledge
Our research question focuses on the impacts of
external knowledge onparametric knowledge . We
discuss how we extract the parametric knowledge
in agraph structure to capture their relations, and
introduce various types of external knowledge as
distractors .
3.1 Parametric Knowledge Graph
LLMs have learned through pre-training a mass
amount of parametric knowledge that is largely in-
terconnected. As mentioned in Section 1, these in-
terconnections impact how LLMs react to different
direct or indirect distractions in external knowledge.
To reveal such internal knowledge structure, we
propose a novel framework to construct a model’s
parametric knowledge graph (PKG).PKG is a semantic net that integrates a model’s
parametric knowledge . It consists of nodes that rep-
resent entities (denoted by E), and edges that repre-
sentrelations (denoted by R). Drawing parallels to
Knowledge Graph (KG), PKG allows for turning
theimplicit knowledge within a model into explicit
and structured representations that are transpar-
ent for inspection and flexible for extension. Its
automatic construction also provides convenience
for the extraction and modification of parametric
knowledge. While traditional KGs are grounded
in real-world facts (Fensel et al., 2020), our ap-
proach stands as the first to use KG as an analogy
for eliciting the model’s parametric knowledge.
Construction To automatically construct the
PKG, we provide a set of specification rules , which
defines what kinds of relations can exist in which
types of entities. More concretely, we abstract each
entity E(e.g., France) in PKG into a type (“Coun-
try”), and create rules for each type in the form of
(R, target type) . For example, the entity type
“Country” can extend the relation “capital is”, tar-
geting an answer of type “City.” In practice, these
rules are applied in natural language templates (Ap-
pendix A), which closely map the LLM’s logic
pathway to the graph in an interpretable way.
Once the rules are set, a PKG can be automati-
cally extended in a depth-first manner for any given
root node (with an entity Eand its corresponding
type). For example, in Figure 2B, upon assigning
the root node to “Canada”, our framework sequen-
tially extends all relations associated with the root
type “Country”. The model then seeks an answer
corresponding to each target type, recursively shap-
ing the whole PKG. Experimentally, we apply con-
sistency checks and only regard the answers that
the model sticks to during consecutive queries as
parametric knowledge (Appendix A).
Extraction One core advantage of PKG is that
it enables us to extract data chains with structural
variety : As in Figure 2C, PKG contains not only
multi-hop structures, but also multi-child (where
multiple answers exist for a given entity and re-
lation) and multi-dependent relations (where two
indispensable entities jointly decide the answer for
a relation). Such complexity enables the analyses
of different types of relations in parametric knowl-
edge.
To support controlled experiments, we extract
the sub-graphs from PKG with different structures,

--- PAGE 4 ---
Type: 
Country
[capital is? 
--City ;
founded in? 
--Year ;
… ]
Type:   
City
[in country?
--Country ;
2020 mayor is? 
--Person ;
… ]
Defining Rules
ROOTType:
Country(Fill In)Canada
Type: 
City
Type: 
Year
ROOT
Multi -
dependentMulti -
childMulti -hop
PKG Construction Structure Extraction Distractor Preparation
TorontoNew 
YorkOriginal 2-hop 
Structure
A B C D
Canada
Ottawa
Thinking…Canada
Ottawa
Jim WatsonFigure 2: The pipeline for the construction of PKG and distractors. Figure A, B: The automatic construction of the
model’s PKG with defined rules. Figure C: The extraction of various PKG structures. Figure D: The modification of
PKG to construct distractors.
Table 1: Three multi-hop and three multi-dependent structures we investigate in the experiments. The red and blue
nodes represent the starting entities, while other nodes are implicit (need reasoning to reach instead of directly given
in the query Examples ). The green edges denote the multi-dependent relation, which is contained in the pivot hop ,
while other purple edges denote other explicit relations.
nodes, and edges. To transform them into a
usable format, we linearize each sub-graph
into a “data chain” represented by triplets
[(E0, R1, E1),(E′
1, R2, E2), ...,(E′
n−1, Rn, En)]
(Ek=E′
kfor multi-hop chains). As shown in
Table 1, we mainly apply the multi-hop (2, 3,
and 4-hop) structures as the basis of queries in
experiments; To further capture the non-linearity,
we define three multi-dependent structures (Trivedi
et al., 2022), each containing multiple hops and a
core multi-dependent relation (Table 1, right). We
denote the hop that contains the multi-dependent
relation in the data chain as the pivot hop .
The answer for the pivot hop relies on two up-
stream entities, and both of them can serve as the
ending node for multi-hop chains of lengths Aand
B, respectively. Simultaneously, the answer entity
for the pivot hop can serve as the starting node for
a multi-hop chain of length C. The values of A,
B, andCcollectively govern the specific configu-ration of the multi-dependent structure, succinctly
referred to as the A-B-Cstructure.
3.2 External Knowledge Distractors
The external knowledge in our experiments is in-
troduced through distractors , which serve as the
source of interference to the model’s PKG.
Distractors are directly derived by modifying the
extracted raw data chains from the model’s PKG.
Figure 2D shows a simplified example where the
capital of “Canada” is substituted with “Toronto”,
and the subject of “2020 mayor” is replaced with
“New York”. In both cases, distractors are derived
from modifying a 2-hop chain. We prompt GPT-
3.5 for the distractor’s automatic construction, as
detailed in Appendix B and Figure 18 to Figure 23.
The distractor will be presented as a natural lan-
guage description at the beginning of model-user
interaction shown in Figure 1.
We systematically create distractors by varying

--- PAGE 5 ---
Figure 3: An Illustration of different types of distractors we apply in experiments.
four dimensions (Figure 3): distract methods, de-
grees, positions, and formats, as detailed below.
These types of distractors allow for a nuanced ex-
ploration of how alterations in different compo-
nents of the PKG can lead to varied effects in the
model’s responses.
Distract Methods Different distract methods re-
veal how the external knowledge is related to the
original parametric knowledge. As in Figure 3A,
Object Distractor introduces distraction by chang-
ing the object of the original parametric knowledge
in the raw data chain. For instance, by changing
the original object “Washington DC” into “Beijing”
while preserving the subject and relation, the re-
sulting external knowledge “The capital of US is
Beijing” constitutes an Object Distractor .Object
Distractor often represents an explicit contradic-
tion to the model’s original parametric belief.
Similarly, Subject Distractor introduces distrac-
tion by changing the subject, while Indirect Dis-
tractor changes both the subject and the object
while preserving the relation. As we always query
for the Object in knowledge given the Subject and
Relation , this makes Object Distractor an explicit
contradiction to the model’s original parametricbelief, while the other two are “weaker”. This dis-
tinction may lead to different resulting impacts.
Distract Degrees Various distract degrees illus-
trate how severely the external knowledge devi-
ates from the original parametric knowledge (Fig-
ure 3B). This deviation is measured through type:
We define the distractor as Type Match if the edited
entity and original entity belong to the same type
(e.g., city “Washington DC” to city “Beijing”), and
Type Shift if otherwise (e.g., city “Washington DC”
to animal “Elephant.”) Because of the change in
the underlying type, Type Shift Distrcators are of-
ten evidently false information, while Type Match
Distrcators are more confounding to models. This
makes distract degrees important as they reflect
how well could the models accept knowledge with
different credibility.
Distract Positions Built upon distract methods
and degrees, different distract positions reflect to
which relation in the extracted data chain is the
external information introduced. This attribute of
the distractors doesn’t describe how to concretely
modify the knowledge into distractions, but rather
where to introduce this distraction. In Figure 3C,
we present three examples of different distract po-

--- PAGE 6 ---
Person
20%
Year
16%
City
12%
Country 8%School 5%Mountain 4%Airport 3%Language
3%Song 3%Others
26%GPT3.5 Model
Year
20%
Person
19%
City
10%
Country 8%Company 5%Film 5%Song 4%Airport 4%Language
3%Others
22%MPT ModelFigure 4: Ratio of different types in model’s PKG.
Dimensions / Model GPT3.5 MPT-7B
Avg Node Num 278 166
Avg Edge Num 467 276
Multi-dependent Rels 769 443
Multi-child Rels 192 124
Multi-hop
Structures2-hop 5,361 3,360
3-hop 14,523 8,642
4-hop 28,297 17,064
Table 2: The statistics of 8 PKGs we apply respectively
for GPT3.5 and MPT-7B. Rels denotes relations. On
average, GPT3.5 exhibits a more expansive and intricate
PKG. The magnitude of distinct relations and varied
structures within the PKGs exemplifies their heightened
diversity and complexity.
sitions. The total number of positions that external
knowledge could be introduced is decided by the
total number of hops in a knowledge structure. Dif-
ferent distract positions in essence represent differ-
ent stages in the evolving user-model interaction.
For multi-dependent structures, we can also uti-
lize distract positions as a means to distinguish the
unique impact of introducing distractions to the
pivot hop.
Distract Format The distract format differenti-
ates the context of external knowledge. Based on
the context length, we introduce Single Sentence
Distractor , which states the external knowledge
in one simple sentence, and Paragraph Distrac-
tor, which describes the knowledge through 3-4
sentences with supporting details. In Row D of
Figure 3, we illustrate how a simple piece of exter-
nal knowledge “Theodore Roosevelt was born in
Boston” can be extended to a paragraph. Different
distract formats are introduced to prove whether the
model possesses a certain bias towards lengthier
and more detailed descriptions.4 Experiment Setup
To understand the model’s reaction when external
knowledge interferes with its parametric knowl-
edge, we conduct experiments by systematically
varying the combinations of the model’s parametric
knowledge structures and the external knowledge
distractors.
4.1 Method
Each structure we extract from PKG contains multi-
ple hops of queries, which constitute the data chain
that represents the model’s original logic pathway.
As we aim to inspect the model’s responses during
active interaction instead of testing its multi-hop
reasoning ability, we follow the “instance-wise”
probing method proposed by Zhong et al. (2023)
and test the data chain in a one-hop manner after
the introduction of distractors.
As illustrated previously in Figure 1, we first
present the distractor to the model as the introduced
external knowledge. Next, for the data chain
[(E0, R1, E1),(E′
1, R2, E2), ...,(E′
n−1, Rn, En)]
extracted, where two entities Eand a relation R
form a knowledge triplet, we first probe for the
model’s answer A1after given (E0, R1). Then, we
continue to probe the next hop of the query, while
giving the model all previous interaction history.
The new query is based on (A1, R2)ifE′
1=E1
(this always holds for multi-hop structures) or
based on (E′
1, R2)ifE′
1̸=E1(this only happens
for multi-dependent structures), and we ask for
the model’s answer A2. This iterates until all
the queries are done or the model abstains from
answering.
Controlled Settings To control the variables in
our experiment, for all the studies except knowl-
edge structures, we experiment on all the multi-hop
structures as raw data chains. For all the studies
except the external knowledge format, we apply
Single Sentence as the distractor’s knowledge for-
mat. Please refer to Appendix C for a more detailed
explanation of each experimental setting.
4.2 Models
We conduct experiments utilizing both the open-
source MPT-7B (ML, 2023) and the black-box
GPT3.5 models (OpenAI, 2022). MPT-7B and
GPT3.5 are selected for their robust interaction ca-
pabilities with users, which aligns well with our
experimental design. Furthermore, the open-source

--- PAGE 7 ---
nature of MPT-7B enables the analysis of confi-
dence values. Please also refer to Appendix C
for more details about the hyper-parameters we
apply. We also present some experiment results
from GPT3 as additional support to our findings in
Appendix E.
4.3 Data
We construct 8 PKGs with different root nodes for
both GPT3.5 and MPT-7B using manually defined
rules. In total, we used 17 types and 63 relations
in the construction rules. The statistical findings
of the raw PKGs we apply are summarized in Fig-
ure 4 and Table 2. For all the studies besides the
knowledge structures in PKG, we employ N-hop
data chains ( N∈2,3,4), utilizing 200 chains for
each type. Each N-hop data chain affords Nposi-
tions for external knowledge introduction, three dis-
tract methods, and two distract degrees, resulting in
6Nrounds of queries (or, 6Ndifferent distractors)
and6N2hops of queries per original chain. Con-
sequently, these constitute 10,800 query rounds,
encompassing a total of 34,800 query hops.
For the study on knowledge structures in PKG,
we extract 100 raw data chains for each multi-
dependent structure type illustrated in the right
column of Figure 1. The collected chains consti-
tute 6,600 query rounds, encompassing a total of
24,600 query hops. The tool for automatic PKG
construction and all the data we apply is released.
4.4 Metrics
Consistency Our primary metric is consistency ,
which quantifies whether the model will stick to
the answer in its PKG during multiple rounds of
queries even with the presence of distractors. For-
mally, among Nquery chains C1, C2, ..., C N, the
model outputs the final answer that adheres to its
PKG in Mchains. Consistency is defined as:
Consistency ({C1, ..., C N}) =M
N.
It reflects the ratio of query chains from PKG that
are not affected by the external distractors.
Confidence Moreover, inspired by Kadavath
et al. (2022), we also explore the MPT-7B’s likeli-
hood of outputting the target entity through the
computation of confidence . Given the tokens
t0, t1, ..., t Mof a core entity Ein the model’s re-
sponse, the model’s confidence in outputting this
Figure 5: Statistics of the ratio of conforming responses
with respect to the confidence placed in the correspond-
ing relations in PKG. From left to right, as the confi-
dence in a particular relation in PKG rises, the model is
more likely to provide answers that conform with the
PKG despite the presence of distractions.
Figure 6: The distribution of the change of confidence
after introducing the distractors with respect to conform-
ing and deviated responses. The area under the curve left
of 0 represents the ratio of negative confidence change,
and vice versa. With external knowledge, the model’s
confidence generally increases, especially for deviated
responses.
entity as the answer is defined as:
Confidence (E) =tMY
t=t0ezt
PN
i=1ezi,
where ztdenotes the raw score (logit) associated
with the token t, and Ndenotes the total number
of tokens in the vocabulary.
Diving deeper into the model’s responses, we
further look into concrete model behaviors both
at the final answer and across the chain. First, for
thefinal answers , we split inconsistent answers
into abstention (when a full query chain cannot
be completed because the model starts to answer
e.g., “I don’t know” at certain hops in a chain), and
variation (when the model reaches a final answer,
but not same as the original PKG). Then, across
the chain , we also study if the model’s answer for
a particular hop of the query adheres to its PKG
or not by categorizing each model’s responses as
either conforming (when the model answers as its
original PKG) or deviated (when the model’s an-
swer is from the distractor).

--- PAGE 8 ---
Table 3: An overview of our experimental results and conclusions. We provide results on GPT3.5 and MPT-7B’s
consistency and confidence (macro-average on different structures), investigating the impacts of various distractors
on multi-hop and multi-dependent structures in PKG. Results that we focus on are shaded: green is applied for the
highest numerical value for a distractor type, while red is applied for the lowest . Please refer to the Appendix for
detailed scores of different structure types instead of macro-average.
5 Experiment Results
5.1 Effectiveness of Distractors through
Confidence Analysis
Before diving into the specific effects of different
distractors, we first analyze in general why the dis-
tractors we introduce are effective . We conduct
analysis through the lens of confidence to unveil
the mechanism behind the model’s responses under
distractions.
Consistency occurs with high confidence. We
observe that the model is more likely to provide re-
sponses conforming to PKG when it is already con-
fident with this piece of knowledge in PKG. In Fig-
ure 5, we show the ratio of conforming responses
generally rises as the confidence of that queried re-
lation in the model’s PKG increases. From another
perspective, this also indicates if the model lacks
confidence in a particular knowledge from PKG
initially, the distractor is more likely to succeed incausing deviation during later queries.
Response deviates with raised confidence. We
find that the model’s confidence generally rises
with the introduction of external knowledge, es-
pecially for the deviated responses. In Figure 6,
we measure how the confidence changes with the
introduction of distractors. We plot the distribu-
tion of changes respectively for the conforming
and deviated responses, and discover that: i) The
area under positive confidence change is generally
larger, indicating that external knowledge in gen-
eral bolsters the model’s confidence. ii) Most of the
deviated responses experience an increase in con-
fidence, proving that the distractors we introduce
can deviate the model’s responses with generally
higher confidence.
5.2 Results on Different Distractor Types
After gaining a general understanding of how dis-
tractors are effective through their interactions with

--- PAGE 9 ---
Table 4: The rate of abstention and variation in the incon-
sistent chains when confronting distractors of different
degrees for both GPT3.5 and MPT-7B. The results are
the macro-averages on three multi-hop structures. Type
Shift Distractors cause more abstentions.
the model’s confidence, we continue to investigate
the impacts of distract degrees, methods, positions,
and knowledge formats. The numerical results and
major conclusions are presented in Table 3A.
Distract Degrees: Models exhibit resistance to
knowledge that evidently lacks veracity. We
discover that compared to Type Match Distractors ,
Type Shift Distractors are less successful in mis-
leading the model’s responses. In the first row of
Table 3A, we show the consistency is higher on
Type Shift Distractors for both GPT3.5 and MPT-
7B. The observations are significant: With a Stu-
dent’s t-test, we obtain p <0.001in both cases
(Appendix D.1). As Type Shift Distractors changes
the type of the edited entity and often yields exter-
nal knowledge beyond commonsense (e.g. “The
capital of US is Elephant ”), our results demon-
strate the LLMs are resistant to such knowledge
that obviously lacks veracity.
Nevertheless, the overall confidence of the
model’s responses decreases for Type Shift Distrac-
tors, suggesting that while the model may reject
such distractors, the presence of these severely al-
tered information can still exert strong effects of
uncertainty.
We also investigate the inconsistent chains and
discover that: i) Compared to MPT-7B, GPT3.5 is
more likely to abstain under interference. ii) Com-
pared to Type Match Distractors ,Type Shift Dis-
tractors are more likely to cause abstention. The
error analysis is presented in Table 4. We provide
more detailed results and further analysis to confi-
dence in Appendix D.1.
Distract Methods: Object Distractors lead to
the lowest consistency, while Indirect Distrac-
torsalso exhibit interfering effects. We observe
thatObject Distractors , which bring directly con-
flicting external knowledge, particularly drive the
model’s deviation from its PKG in responses. As
Table 5: The rate of abstention and variation in the in-
consistent chains when confronting distractors applying
different methods for both GPT3.5 and MPT-7B. The
results are the macro-averages on three multi-hop struc-
tures. Object Distractors cause the least abstention in
GPT3.5, while the most for MPT-7B.
Distractors Object Indirect Subject
Confidence (%) 77.70 74.31 71.90
Table 6: The average confidence of relations in the PKG
that the model deviates in later responses. “Weaker” dis-
tract methods tend to mislead the model on the knowl-
edge that it is originally not confident about.
Figure 7: Case study on how the model deviates in re-
sponse under Indirect Distractors . The weak belief of
target knowledge in its PKG and some intrinsic similar-
ity in details mislead both models.
presented in the second row of Table 3A, consis-
tency is the lowest for Object Distractors among
the three methods for both GPT3.5 and MPT-7B (P-
value p <0.001in all cases with Student’s t-test,
detailed in Appendix D.2). This could be attributed
to the fact that only Object Distractors retain the
subject of original knowledge, thus forging an erro-
neous relation link that diverges from the model’s
original logic pathway. This more easily leads the
model to a false final answer.
For inconsistent chains, we discover that Ob-
ject Distractors lead to the lowest abstention in
GPT3.5 but the highest in MPT-7B. This indicates
that among the three distract methods, GPT3.5 is
less likely to abstain if the distractor is a direct con-
flict, while MPT-7B shows vice versa. The error
analysis is presented in Table 4. We also provide
more detailed results and further analysis to confi-
dence in Appendix D.2.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Figure 8: The consistency with respect to which posi-
tion is the distractor introduced to. MPT-7B’s consis-
tency rises gradually as the position to introduce the
distractor moves backward, while GPT3.5 shows a high
consistency if the distractor is introduced to the first hop
(beginning) of the query chain.
Despite the direct misleading effect of Object
Distractors , we observe Subject andIndirect Dis-
tractors also exhibit interference. Both methods
alter the subject and make the introduced external
knowledge not explicitly align with the query, so
they are “weaker” distract methods that should not
directly mislead the model. Why these “weaker”
distractors also lead to low consistency?
Inspired by previous studies in Section 5.1, we
analyze the confidence of relations within the PKG
that the model subsequently deviates in its re-
sponses. We discover when confronting a “weaker”
distract method, the model is more susceptible to
deviate in queries where its initial belief in the PKG
is also weak. As showcased in Table 6, the average
confidence of relations that later lead to deviations
is the lowest for Subject Distractors , followed by
theIndirect Distractors .
Specifically, we present a case study in Figure 7:
For GPT3.5, the uncertainty about the user’s query
drives it to extract “1947” from the distractor as
the final answer, despite the subject in distractor
being “US” rather than “China”‘ as inquired. The
same happens to MPT-7B, as the same additional
information “in the year 1948” presented in both
the query and the distractor drives the model to
trust “Santa Claus” as the company’s CEO, though
it is evidently false.
Distract Positions: Models resist distractions as
interaction evolves, and GPT3.5 also defends
against early distractions. We discover the con-
sistency of both models generally rises as the posi-
tion where the distractors are introduced moves to-
ward the tail of the data chain. In addition, GPT3.5
is more likely to resist external knowledge if it is
introduced in the beginning. To better illustrate the
Figure 9: The consistency with respect to querying
only the last two hops in the 3-hop and 4-hop chains.
While MPT-7B still maintains an upward trend, GPT3.5
exhibits a downward trend similar to that of a 2-hop
chain (pink) in Figure 8.
MetricsConforming Res. Deviated Res.
Match Shift Match Shift
Change of
Confidence
(%)2-hop -1.55 -2.34 -2.68 +2.42
3-hop -1.25 -0.69 -0.50 +5.69
4-hop -0.94 -0.21 +0.51 +0.40
Table 7: The change of confidence with respect to dis-
tractors of different degrees when the knowledge for-
mat becomes lengthier and more detailed. We discover
the model’s confidence rises mostly in the deviated re-
sponses to Type Shift Distractors .
trends, we differentiate three knowledge structures
and plot their consistency respectively in Figure 8.
For both models, the gradual rising trend could be
attributed to their declining attention towards the
distractor as the query goes on: as the chatting his-
tory accumulates, both models become harder to
deviate, thus introducing a distractor that interferes
with later hops raises consistency. In addition, the
high consistency of GPT3.5 if distracted initially
implies it maintains a heightened sensitivity to the
veracity of external knowledge, but MPT-7B lacks
such a mechanism.
To mitigate the influence of queries themselves,
we conduct an ablation study by querying only the
last two hops of the 3-hop and 4-hop chains. From
the results in Figure 9, we discover that: i) Overall
consistency increases as a shorter data chain is ap-
plied. ii) While MPT-7B’s consistency still rises,
GPT3.5’s consistency declines. The higher con-
sistency observed when distractors are introduced
to interfere with the first hop provides additional
evidence of GPT3.5’s heightened vigilance in the
beginning towards information that deviates from
its PKG. We provide additional detailed results in
Appendix D.3.

--- PAGE 11 ---
MetricsConforming Res. Deviated Res.
Obj. Indir. Sbj. Obj. Indir. Sbj.
Change of
Confidence
(%)2-hop -2.21 -1.55 -2.13 -4.52 +3.58 +1.80
3-hop -1.24 -0.67 -0.91 -1.93 -0.28 +9.26
4-hop -0.66 -1.03 -0.56 -1.80 -0.16 +5.03
Table 8: The change of confidence with respect to dis-
tractors applying different methods when the knowledge
format becomes lengthier and more detailed. Obj.,Indir.
andSbj.respectively denotes Object ,Indirect , and Sub-
ject Distractors . We discover the model’s confidence
tends to rise on deviated responses for “weaker” distract
methods.
Distract Formats: Lengthier distract contexts
lower the consistency. We discover that both
black-box and open-source models are more sus-
ceptible to placing false trust in lengthier exter-
nal knowledge that is seemingly more compelling.
This is proved by comparing the consistency of all
multi-hop structures between introducing Single
Sentence andParagraph as external knowledge for-
mats of distractors. The results presented in the
fourth row of Table 3A demonstrate a consistent
trend: the consistency decreases for both GPT3.5
and MPT-7B models ( p <0.001in both cases, de-
tailed in Appendix D.4) when the context of the
distractor is longer and more detailed.
Why would the model’s belief change, even
when the core content of the distractor stays the
same? We further investigate the interactions be-
tween the format and other distractor attributes.
We find that lengthier context raises belief in more
severely edited external knowledge , introduced
through Type Shift Distractors . Specifically, we di-
vide the external knowledge based on Type Match
andType Shift , and examine the resulting changes
in confidence in both deviated and conforming re-
sponses caused by the alteration in the external
knowledge format. In Table 7, we observe that
MPT-7B’s confidence rises mostly in its deviated
responses to Type Shift Distractors , while its confi-
dence decreases in all conforming responses. This
implies that, in general, making the context length-
ier lowers the model’s confidence in extracting a
target entity as the answer in response. However,
it also boosts the model’s confidence in trusting
theType Shift Distractors , which are more severely
edited external knowledge.
Besides different degrees, we also discover that
the more detailed contexts tend to raise the model’s
belief in “weaker” distract methods . Together with
Figure 10: The consistency of GPT3.5 and MPT-7B
when applying distractors to different positions in three
multi-dependent structures. Pardenotes the chains ex-
tended from the parent nodes of the pivot hop. The
results show when the distractor is introduced to inter-
fere with the pivot hop, GPT3.5’s consistency is the
lowest while MPT-7B’s consistency is the highest.
the previous finding, it could be concluded that
lengthier and more detailed contexts are effective
in making the model trust the knowledge that it
previously tended not to believe in. In Table 8,
we show the resulting change of confidence when
the knowledge format becomes Paragraph with re-
spect to different distract methods. We discover
that MPT-7B’s confidence generally rises in its de-
viated responses when applying Indirect Distrac-
torsorSubject Distractors , which are both “weaker”
distract methods.
5.3 Results on More PKG Structures
All previous analyses employ the multi-hop struc-
tures within the model’s PKG, primarily focusing
on one-to-one relations. In this section, we extend
the distractor’s influence upon multi-dependent
structures as introduced in Section 4.3, and investi-
gate the impacts brought by the sub-graphs of PKG
with various knowledge structures.
Results for distract methods and degrees remain
consistent. Our previous conclusions on distract
methods and degrees are further supported by multi-
dependent structures. Please refer to the consistent
trend in Table 3B and Appendix D.5 for details.
Pivot hop exhibits unique traits. The results of
introducing distractors on different positions are
incomparable to previous conclusions, as the un-
derlying knowledge structure changes. For multi-
dependent structures, we discover that GPT3.5
achieves the lowest consistency if distracted on
thepivot hop, while MPT-7B achieves the highest
consistency.
To better observe the trend, we again differenti-
ate three multi-dependent structures, and present

--- PAGE 12 ---
our detailed results in Figure 10. Both 1-1-0 and
1-1-1 structures do not contain Par2-Hop2 as the
two parent nodes for pivot hop are only the ends for
two 1-hop queries. Both 1-1-0 and 1-2-0 structures
do not contain Child-Hop1 as the answer nodes
for their pivot hops are also the ending nodes for
the whole chain. As the pivot hop depends on two
upstream entities, the resulting trend in Figure 10
may imply that GPT3.5 is more easily deviated
by distractors with auxiliary external information,
while vice versa for MPT-7B.
6 Discussions
Below, we highlight three rather unexpected obser-
vations in our study and their implications.
Interference of Indirect Distraction While we
can expect direct conflicts to cause the model’s
inconsistency, we are surprised that indirect dis-
tractions could also mislead the model (Figure 7).
Their success could mainly be attributed to the
model’s lack of confidence in the original PKG:
If the model’s confidence about this particularly
queried relation in PKG is low, but about the rela-
tion in external knowledge is high , then the model
might deviate even if the external information is not
related to what the question asks. We further iden-
tify two reasons why the model tends to believe in
external knowledge. i) Veracity :Indirect Distrac-
torcould be a fact (as shown in Row A of Figure 3).
Compared to other methods, the model’s “faith”
in the correctness of external knowledge makes it
doubt its original answers . ii) Matched Details :
The models are more easily distracted by similar
details presented in both the query and the external
information (e.g., in Figure 7, “1948” appears in
both the distractor and the user’s query for MPT-
7B). These matching details lead the model to be-
lieve that there is a strong correlation between the
distractor and the query, thus causing the model
to select an entity from external knowledge as the
answer.
The impact of indirect distraction flags addi-
tional challenges in misinformation, as most efforts
tend to focus on preventing LLMs from trusting
wrong statements. Future studies on effectively re-
moving information snippets that pose unexpected
effects will be valuable in the space.
Bias Towards Lengthier Context Both GPT and
MPT models demonstrate low consistency when
presented with lengthier and more detailed knowl-edge formats. This implies that the model’s judg-
ment is not solely rooted in facts and veracity, but
rather resembles human decision-making, influ-
enced by persuasiveness. Though lacking decisive
evidence, we see that the model is more inclined
to accept external knowledge it was previously un-
aware of or had doubts about, rather than blatantly
false information (e.g., “The Sun rises in the west”).
This tendency becomes more pronounced when
such information is provided within a specific and
detailed context with supporting details. This inher-
ent bias in LLMs directly influences our approach
to using them and raises concerns about poten-
tial misuse, whether external information is intro-
duced explicitly or implicitly. Verification methods
that compare model behaviors on long prompts vs.
short but equally informative prompts (e.g., a high-
quality summarization) might be a useful layer for
rectifying LLM outputs.
GPT vs. MPT: GPT’s Initial Distrust in Exter-
nal Knowledge We have discovered a different
trend between GPT and MPT models with respect
to the position to which distractors are introduced.
GPT3.5 maintains a high consistency if the dis-
traction is introduced at the beginning of the data
chain, and we show in Appendix E.3 that GPT3
also exhibits a similar trend. This vigilance and
distrust of external information in the beginning is
not exhibited in MPT-7B, and may be attributed
to the training process or some protection mech-
anisms behind the GPT black-box models. From
our results, we also observe that GPT models are
most likely to deviate in the 2ndhop. This implies
that though vigilant to the information’s veracity
initially, GPT’s attention will decrease as the rea-
soning or interaction goes on, which heightens the
risk of hallucination. Unfortunately, we have yet to
reveal the root cause of such behavior differences,
but we hope to look more into comparing different
LLMs.
7 Conclusions
This paper mainly investigates the impacts of exter-
nal knowledge on parametric knowledge through
systematic experiments. We build a framework that
reveals the model’s parametric knowledge graph
and automatically builds the external knowledge
distractors as the source of interference. We con-
duct controlled experiments that investigate the
impacts of external knowledge’s distract degrees,
methods, positions, and formats on various para-

--- PAGE 13 ---
metric knowledge structures including multi-hop
and multi-dependent ones. Our results on both
GPT3.5 and MPT show that both models tend to
provide responses that deviate from their original
PKG when the external information poses direct
conflicts ( Object Distractors ), gives confounding
changes that are not obviously false ( Type Match
Distractors ), or provides external knowledge in
detailed and lengthier context ( Paragraph Distrac-
tors). In addition, we discover that GPT models
are vigilant to external information’s veracity in the
beginning ( Distractors at 1stHop), and that both
models are susceptible to even unrelated external
knowledge ( Indirect Distractors ). These studies re-
veal the mechanism of how LLMs handle potential
conflicts, and imply the potential risk of hallucina-
tion as LLMs integrate external knowledge, even
introduced implicitly. We hope our framework can
serve as the testbed for more insightful investiga-
tions into the active interaction between external
and parametric knowledge.
References
Rohan Anil, Andrew M. Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin John-
son, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos, Siamak
Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng
Chen, Eric Chu, Jonathan H. Clark, Laurent El
Shafey, Yanping Huang, Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Gau-
rav Mishra, Erica Moreira, Mark Omernick, Kevin
Robinson, Sebastian Ruder, Yi Tay, Kefan Xiao,
Yuanzhong Xu, Yujing Zhang, Gustavo Hernandez
Abrego, Junwhan Ahn, Jacob Austin, Paul Barham,
Jan Botha, James Bradbury, Siddhartha Brahma,
Kevin Brooks, Michele Catasta, Yong Cheng, Colin
Cherry, Christopher A. Choquette-Choo, Aakanksha
Chowdhery, Clément Crepy, Shachi Dave, Mostafa
Dehghani, Sunipa Dev, Jacob Devlin, Mark Díaz,
Nan Du, Ethan Dyer, Vlad Feinberg, Fangxiaoyu
Feng, Vlad Fienber, Markus Freitag, Xavier Gar-
cia, Sebastian Gehrmann, Lucas Gonzalez, Guy Gur-
Ari, Steven Hand, Hadi Hashemi, Le Hou, Joshua
Howland, Andrea Hu, Jeffrey Hui, Jeremy Hur-
witz, Michael Isard, Abe Ittycheriah, Matthew Jagiel-
ski, Wenhao Jia, Kathleen Kenealy, Maxim Krikun,
Sneha Kudugunta, Chang Lan, Katherine Lee, Ben-
jamin Lee, Eric Li, Music Li, Wei Li, YaGuang Li,
Jian Li, Hyeontaek Lim, Hanzhao Lin, Zhongtao Liu,
Frederick Liu, Marcello Maggioni, Aroma Mahendru,
Joshua Maynez, Vedant Misra, Maysam Moussalem,
Zachary Nado, John Nham, Eric Ni, Andrew Nys-
trom, Alicia Parrish, Marie Pellat, Martin Polacek,
Alex Polozov, Reiner Pope, Siyuan Qiao, Emily Reif,
Bryan Richter, Parker Riley, Alex Castro Ros, Au-
rko Roy, Brennan Saeta, Rajkumar Samuel, Renee
Shelby, Ambrose Slone, Daniel Smilkov, David R.
So, Daniel Sohn, Simon Tokumine, Dasha Valter,
Vijay Vasudevan, Kiran V odrahalli, Xuezhi Wang,Pidong Wang, Zirui Wang, Tao Wang, John Wiet-
ing, Yuhuai Wu, Kelvin Xu, Yunhan Xu, Linting
Xue, Pengcheng Yin, Jiahui Yu, Qiao Zhang, Steven
Zheng, Ce Zheng, Weikang Zhou, Denny Zhou, Slav
Petrov, and Yonghui Wu. 2023. Palm 2 technical
report.
Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace,
Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-V oss, Katherine
Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar
Erlingsson, et al. 2021. Extracting training data from
large language models. In 30th USENIX Security
Symposium (USENIX Security 21) , pages 2633–2650.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin,
Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts,
Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton,
Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. 2022. Palm: Scaling
language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.02311 .
Roi Cohen, Eden Biran, Ori Yoran, Amir Globerson,
and Mor Geva. 2023. Evaluating the ripple effects of
knowledge editing in language models.
Dieter Fensel, Umutcan ¸ Sim¸ sek, Kevin Angele, Elwin
Huaman, Elias Kärle, Oleksandra Panasiuk, Ioan
Toma, Jürgen Umbrich, Alexander Wahler, Dieter
Fensel, et al. 2020. Introduction: what is a knowl-
edge graph? Knowledge graphs: Methodology, tools
and selected use cases , pages 1–10.
Suchin Gururangan, Ana Marasovi ´c, Swabha
Swayamdipta, Kyle Lo, Iz Beltagy, Doug Downey,
and Noah A Smith. 2020. Don’t stop pretraining:
Adapt language models to domains and tasks.
InProceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics .
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Kelvin Guu, Kenton Lee, Zora Tung, Panupong Pasu-
pat, and Ming-Wei Chang. 2020. Realm: retrieval-
augmented language model pre-training. In Proceed-
ings of the 37th International Conference on Machine
Learning , pages 3929–3938.
Gautier Izacard and Édouard Grave. 2021. Leveraging
passage retrieval with generative models for open do-
main question answering. In Proceedings of the 16th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume ,
pages 874–880.
Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Jun Araki, and Graham
Neubig. 2020. How can we know what language
models know? Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics , 8:423–438.
Saurav Kadavath, Tom Conerly, Amanda Askell, Tom
Henighan, Dawn Drain, Ethan Perez, Nicholas
Schiefer, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Nova DasSarma, Eli
Tran-Johnson, Scott Johnston, Sheer El-Showk,
Andy Jones, Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Anna
Chen, Yuntao Bai, Sam Bowman, Stanislav Fort,
Deep Ganguli, Danny Hernandez, Josh Jacobson,

--- PAGE 14 ---
Jackson Kernion, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Ka-
mal Ndousse, Catherine Olsson, Sam Ringer, Dario
Amodei, Tom Brown, Jack Clark, Nicholas Joseph,
Ben Mann, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah, and Jared
Kaplan. 2022. Language models (mostly) know what
they know.
Angeliki Lazaridou, Adhi Kuncoro, Elena Gribovskaya,
Devang Agrawal, Adam Liska, Tayfun Terzi, Mai
Gimenez, Cyprien de Masson d’Autume, Tomas Ko-
cisky, Sebastian Ruder, et al. 2021. Mind the gap:
Assessing temporal generalization in neural language
models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , 34:29348–29363.
Kevin Meng, Arnab Sen Sharma, Alex J Andonian,
Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. 2022. Mass-
editing memory in a transformer. In The Eleventh
International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions .
Eric Mitchell, Charles Lin, Antoine Bosselut, Chelsea
Finn, and Christopher D Manning. 2021. Fast model
editing at scale. In International Conference on
Learning Representations .
Mosaic ML. 2023. Mpt-7b.
Ella Neeman, Roee Aharoni, Or Honovich, Leshem
Choshen, Idan Szpektor, and Omri Abend. 2022.
Disentqa: Disentangling parametric and contextual
knowledge with counterfactual question answering.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.05655 .
Yasumasa Onoe, Michael J. Q. Zhang, Shankar Padman-
abhan, Greg Durrett, and Eunsol Choi. 2023. Can
lms learn new entities from descriptions? challenges
in propagating injected knowledge.
OpenAI. 2022. Chatgpt.
OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report.
Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel,
Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu, and
Alexander Miller. 2019. Language models as knowl-
edge bases? In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing and the 9th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) ,
pages 2463–2473.
Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Yankai Lin, Weize Chen,
Ning Ding, Ganqu Cui, Zheni Zeng, Yufei Huang,
Chaojun Xiao, Chi Han, Yi Ren Fung, Yusheng Su,
Huadong Wang, Cheng Qian, Runchu Tian, Kunlun
Zhu, Shihao Liang, Xingyu Shen, Bokai Xu, Zhen
Zhang, Yining Ye, Bowen Li, Ziwei Tang, Jing Yi,
Yuzhang Zhu, Zhenning Dai, Lan Yan, Xin Cong,
Yaxi Lu, Weilin Zhao, Yuxiang Huang, Junxi Yan,
Xu Han, Xian Sun, Dahai Li, Jason Phang, Cheng
Yang, Tongshuang Wu, Heng Ji, Zhiyuan Liu, and
Maosong Sun. 2023. Tool learning with foundation
models.Ori Ram, Yoav Levine, Itay Dalmedigos, Dor Muhlgay,
Amnon Shashua, Kevin Leyton-Brown, and Yoav
Shoham. 2023. In-context retrieval-augmented lan-
guage models.
Adam Roberts, Colin Raffel, and Noam Shazeer. 2020.
How much knowledge can you pack into the param-
eters of a language model? In Proceedings of the
2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages 5418–5426.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta
Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola
Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. 2023. Toolformer:
Language models can teach themselves to use tools.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761 .
Weijia Shi, Sewon Min, Michihiro Yasunaga, Minjoon
Seo, Rich James, Mike Lewis, Luke Zettlemoyer, and
Wen tau Yih. 2023. Replug: Retrieval-augmented
black-box language models.
Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall,
Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-Tze
Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du,
YaGuang Li, Hongrae Lee, Huaixiu Steven Zheng,
Amin Ghafouri, Marcelo Menegali, Yanping Huang,
Maxim Krikun, Dmitry Lepikhin, James Qin, Dehao
Chen, Yuanzhong Xu, Zhifeng Chen, Adam Roberts,
Maarten Bosma, Vincent Zhao, Yanqi Zhou, Chung-
Ching Chang, Igor Krivokon, Will Rusch, Marc
Pickett, Pranesh Srinivasan, Laichee Man, Kathleen
Meier-Hellstern, Meredith Ringel Morris, Tulsee
Doshi, Renelito Delos Santos, Toju Duke, Johnny So-
raker, Ben Zevenbergen, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran,
Mark Diaz, Ben Hutchinson, Kristen Olson, Ale-
jandra Molina, Erin Hoffman-John, Josh Lee, Lora
Aroyo, Ravi Rajakumar, Alena Butryna, Matthew
Lamm, Viktoriya Kuzmina, Joe Fenton, Aaron Co-
hen, Rachel Bernstein, Ray Kurzweil, Blaise Aguera-
Arcas, Claire Cui, Marian Croak, Ed Chi, and Quoc
Le. 2022. Lamda: Language models for dialog appli-
cations.
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier
Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix,
Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal
Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard
Grave, and Guillaume Lample. 2023. Llama: Open
and efficient foundation language models.
Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot,
and Ashish Sabharwal. 2022. musique: Multi-
hop questions via single-hop question composition.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , 10:539–554.
Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot,
and Ashish Sabharwal. 2023. Interleaving retrieval
with chain-of-thought reasoning for knowledge-
intensive multi-step questions.
Chenguang Wang, Xiao Liu, and Dawn Song. 2020.
Language models are open knowledge graphs.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Ruize Wang, Duyu Tang, Nan Duan, Zhongyu Wei,
Xuan-Jing Huang, Jianshu Ji, Guihong Cao, Daxin
Jiang, and Ming Zhou. 2021. K-adapter: Infusing
knowledge into pre-trained models with adapters. In
Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 , pages 1405–1418.
Jian Xie, Kai Zhang, Jiangjie Chen, Renze Lou, and
Yu Su. 2023. Adaptive chameleon or stubborn sloth:
Unraveling the behavior of large language models in
knowledge clashes.
Yunzhi Yao, Shaohan Huang, Li Dong, Furu Wei,
Huajun Chen, and Ningyu Zhang. 2022. Kformer:
Knowledge injection in transformer feed-forward lay-
ers. In CCF International Conference on Natural
Language Processing and Chinese Computing , pages
131–143.
Pengfei Yu and Heng Ji. 2023. Self information up-
date for large language models through mitigating
exposure bias.
Aohan Zeng, Xiao Liu, Zhengxiao Du, Zihan Wang,
Hanyu Lai, Ming Ding, Zhuoyi Yang, Yifan Xu,
Wendi Zheng, Xiao Xia, et al. 2022. Glm-130b: An
open bilingual pre-trained model. In The Eleventh In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations .
Chiyuan Zhang, Daphne Ippolito, Katherine Lee,
Matthew Jagielski, Florian Tramèr, and Nicholas Car-
lini. 2021. Counterfactual memorization in neural
language models.
Zexuan Zhong, Tao Lei, and Danqi Chen. 2022. Train-
ing language models with memory augmentation.
InProceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
5657–5673.
Zexuan Zhong, Zhengxuan Wu, Christopher D. Man-
ning, Christopher Potts, and Danqi Chen. 2023.
Mquake: Assessing knowledge editing in language
models via multi-hop questions.
Wenxuan Zhou, Sheng Zhang, Hoifung Poon, and
Muhao Chen. 2023. Context-faithful prompt-
ing for large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.11315 .

--- PAGE 16 ---
Appendix
A Details on Revealing Model’s PKG
We reveal the model’s PKGs using natural language
templates, as we show in Figure 15. During the
construction of PKGs, we query the model three
times with different temperatures ( T= 0.3,0.5,
and0.7). The prompt for retrieving the answer is
shown in Figure 16. Then, we judge the consis-
tency of the model’s responses through the checker
we present in Figure 17. If we finally get “N/A”,
then we move on to search for other relations com-
plying with the rules that the models are more confi-
dent about. Otherwise, we add the relation and the
model’s consistent answer into the PKG, regarding
it as a piece of model’s parametric knowledge.
B Details on Constructing Distractors
After the extraction of multiple structures as the
original data chain from the model’s PKGs, we per-
form modifications to the data chain to introduce
distractors as external knowledge. This process is
automated with the help of GPT3.5. Among the
four types of distractors, distracting methods and
degrees both directly modify the original informa-
tion. Three distracting methods and two distracting
degrees combine into a total of six types of distrac-
tors. The prompts applied for constructing these six
types of distractors are introduced from Figure 18
to Figure 23.
Upon getting these six types of distractors, the
external information we get is in a format of Sin-
gle Sentence . To turn them into external knowl-
edge presented in multiple sentences, we apply
the prompt in Figure 24 to construct distractors in
Paragraph format. Distractors introduced to inter-
fere with different positions do not need additional
construction.
C Details on Experimental Settings
We apply both GPT3.5 and MPT-7B models. For
all the experiments, we set top-p to 1 and tempera-
tureto 0.3. The same setting across all experiments
guarantees fairness when we are measuring the
model’s consistency and ensures that the model’s
confidence is comparable. We set the max sequence
length to 512, and for both models, we do not add
the frequency or presence penalty.
As introduced in Appendix B, combining dis-
tract methods and degrees, we get six different
types of distractors for each hop of the query (eachMetricsGPT3.5
Match Shift
Consistency
(%)2-hop 59.92 61.00↑1.1
3-hop 56.78 62.33↑5.6
4-hop 51.00 52.17↑1.2
MetricsMPT-7B
Match Shift
Consistency
(%)2-hop 48.25 53.92↑5.7
3-hop 42.22 46.67↑4.5
4-hop 37.88 38.75↑0.9
Confidence
(%)2-hop 82.07 78.86↓3.2
3-hop 80.99 77.78↓3.2
4-hop 79.71 78.40↓1.3
Table 9: The detailed results for GPT3.5 and MPT-7B
when confronting Type Match orType Shift Distractors
as external interfering knowledge. We differentiate mul-
tiple structures instead of performing macro-averaging.
Figure 11: The decrease of confidence brought by
changing from Type Match toType Shift Distractors .
We observe a significant confidence drop for deviated re-
sponses when introducing Type Shift Distractors , while
conforming responses show minor changes.
data chain may have multiple hops of the query).
We experiment with all these distractors. For the
results on distract degrees, we divide the results
based on the two different degrees of the distrac-
tors. For the results on distract methods, we divide
our results based on the three different methods
applied in the distractors. For the results on distract
positions, we divide the results based on which hop
of query in the knowledge structure the distractor is
introduced to. For the results on distract knowledge
formats, we introduce a Paragraph version to all
previous distractors and repeat all the experiments
for comparison.
D Supporting Analysis to Main Results
For some of the main results, we also perform ad-
ditional analysis to further support our claims.
D.1 Distract Degrees
The results of the P-value we provide are derived
from the T-test between all the consistency values

--- PAGE 17 ---
MetricsGPT3.5
Match Shift
Abstention
(%)2-hop 37.42 73.72↑36.3
3-hop 37.53 69.76↑32.2
4-hop 44.05 61.41↑17.4
Variation
(%)2-hop 62.58 26.28↓36.3
3-hop 62.47 30.24↓32.2
4-hop 55.95 38.59↓17.4
MetricsMPT-7B
Match Shift
Abstention
(%)2-hop 4.35 9.22↑4.9
3-hop 3.85 6.35↑2.5
4-hop 8.18 9.93↑1.8
Variation
(%)2-hop 95.65 90.78↓4.9
3-hop 96.15 93.65↓2.5
4-hop 91.82 90.07↓1.8
Table 10: The detailed error analysis on inconsistent
chains for GPT3.5 and MPT-7B when confronting Type
Match orType Shift Distractors as external interfering
knowledge. We differentiate multiple structures instead
of performing macro-averaging.
under the interference of Type Shift Distractors and
Type Match Distractors . Each data chain would
provide a pair of values for comparison, and there
are in total 600 data chains for all 2 / 3 / 4-hop
structures.
The results we provide in Table 3 and Table 4
are macro-average on three structures. We provide
more detailed results regarding different multi-hop
structures in Table 9 (Main Metrics) and Table 10
(Error Analysis). The consistent trend in every
structure provides additional support to our conclu-
sions.
Besides, to further substantiate our claim that
the model resists Type Shift Distractors , we seg-
ment the confidence based on whether the model’s
response is conforming or deviated. Figure 11 dis-
plays that the average confidence of generating a de-
viated response plummets (left chart) when encoun-
tering Type Shift Distractors , while the confidence
of conforming responses shows minor changes.
This implies the primary cause of the confidence
drop stems from the deviated responses: the model
is already hard to be deviated by Type Shift Distrac-
tors, and for responses that aredistracted by them,
the model’s belief in them still remains low.
D.2 Distract Methods
We conduct the T-test for all the resulting consis-
tencies between Object-Indirect Distractors and
Object-Subject Distractors for both GPT3.5 and
MPT-7B. Similarly, each test comprises 600 pairsMetricsGPT3.5
Object Indirect Subject
Consistency
(%)2-hop 40.50↓24.8/35.1 65.25 75.62
3-hop 45.75↓17.8/23.7 63.50 69.42
4-hop 42.44↓12.1/15.4 54.50 57.81
MetricsMPT-7B
Object Indirect Subject
Consistency
(%)2-hop 38.38↓11.5/26.6 49.88 65.00
3-hop 35.25↓8.8/18.8 44.08 54.00
4-hop 33.50↓4.4/10.0 37.94 43.50
Confidence
(%)2-hop 81.87 76.67 82.92
3-hop 80.15 77.10 80.95
4-hop 79.57 77.82 79.80
Table 11: The detailed results for GPT3.5 and MPT-7B
when confronting Object ,Indirect orSubject Distractors
as external interfering knowledge. We differentiate mul-
tiple structures instead of performing macro-averaging.
MetricsGPT3.5
Object Indirect Subject
Abstention
(%)2-hop 47.06↓16.3/17.0 63.31 64.10
3-hop 48.54↓7.2/7.3 55.71 55.86
4-hop 50.81↓0.4/5.8 51.24 56.59
Variation
(%)2-hop 52.94↑16.3/17.0 36.69 35.90
3-hop 51.46↑7.2/7.3 44.29 44.14
4-hop 49.19↑0.4/5.8 48.76 43.41
MetricsMPT-7B
Object Indirect Subject
Abstention
(%)2-hop 8.92↑4.2/3.6 4.74 5.36
3-hop 7.08↑3.5/3.1 3.58 3.99
4-hop 10.24↑2.7/1.0 7.55 9.29
Variation
(%)2-hop 91.08↓4.2/3.6 95.26 94.64
3-hop 92.92↓3.5/3.1 96.42 96.01
4-hop 89.76↓3.5/3.1 92.45 90.71
Table 12: The detailed error analysis on inconsistent
chains for GPT3.5 and MPT-7B when confronting Type
Match orType Shift Distractors as external interfering
knowledge. We differentiate multiple structures instead
of performing macro-averaging.
Figure 12: The confidence of MPT-7B’s conforming
and deviated responses when applying three distract
methods. Results show Object Distractor induces the
highest confidence for deviated responses, while Subject
Distractor induces the highest confidence for conform-
ing responses.

--- PAGE 18 ---
MetricsGPT3.5
1stHop 2ndHop 3rdHop 4thHop
Consistency
(%)2-hop 65.50 57.42 – –
3-hop 64.00 56.08 58.58 –
4-hop 55.83 47.08 49.42 54.00
MetricsMPT-7B
1stHop 2ndHop 3rdHop 4thHop
Consistency
(%)2-hop 48.58 53.58 – –
3-hop 40.42 46.00 46.92 –
4-hop 37.33 36.17 39.58 40.17
Confidence
(%)2-hop 78.48 82.46 – –
3-hop 78.47 80.47 79.24 –
4-hop 79.10 79.38 79.09 78.67
Table 13: The detailed results for GPT3.5 and MPT-7B
when distractors are introduced in different positions as
external interfering knowledge. We differentiate multi-
ple structures instead of performing macro-averaging.
of values for comparison.
We provide detailed results regarding the im-
pacts of three distract methods on different multi-
hop structures in Table 11 (Main Metrics) and Ta-
ble 12 (Error Analysis).
In addition, we analyze MPT-7B’s confidence
with respect to three distract methods in Figure 12.
Again, we divide the confidence based on whether
the response is conforming or deviated. Our find-
ings show that the Object Distractor results in
the highest confidence when the response deviates,
while the confidence for Subject Distractor is high-
est when the response conforms to the PKG. These
results also imply Object Distractor is the most
powerful to deviate the model’s belief, while for
the other two “weaker” distractors, the model still
trusts its original logic pathway in PKG.
D.3 Distract Positions
We provide detailed results on GPT3.5 and MPT-
7B’s consistency and confidence with respect to dif-
ferent positions where the distractor is introduced
in Table 13. We have plotted the trend of consis-
tency in our main results in Figure 8.
D.4 Distract Formats
We conduct the T-test for all the resulting consis-
tencies between Single Sentence andParagraph as
knowledge format for both GPT3.5 and MPT-7B.
Similarly, each test comprises 600 pairs of values
for comparison.
We provide detailed results on GPT3.5 and MPT-
7B’s consistency and confidence with respect to
theSingle Sentence orParagraph as the format ofMetricsGPT3.5
Single Sentence Paragraph
Consistency
(%)2-hop 60.46 57.83↓2.6
3-hop 59.56 56.53↓3.0
4-hop 51.59 48.75↓2.9
MetricsMPT-7B
Single Sentence Paragraph
Consistency
(%)2-hop 51.09 48.38↓2.7
3-hop 44.11 42.34↓1.8
4-hop 38.32 35.46↓2.9
Confidence
(%)2-hop 80.48 78.28↓2.2
3-hop 79.40 78.45↓1.0
4-hop 79.06 78.36↓0.7
Table 14: The detailed results for GPT3.5 and MPT-
7B when confronting Single Sentence orParagraph
as the format of external interfering knowledge. We
differentiate multiple structures instead of performing
macro-averaging.
MetricsGPT3.5
Match Shift
Consistency
(%)1-1-0 46.33 47.33↑1.1
1-1-1 47.75 49.00↑1.3
1-2-0 51.58 54.25↑2.7
MetricsMPT-7B
Match Shift
Consistency
(%)1-1-0 32.00 34.44↑2.4
1-1-1 42.22 46.67↑4.5
1-2-0 32.00 33.08↑1.1
Confidence
(%)1-1-0 76.88 74.96↓1.9
1-1-1 79.35 77.82↓1.5
1-2-0 79.57 77.65↓1.9
Table 15: The detailed results for GPT3.5 and MPT-
7B when multi-dependent structures (1-1-0, 1-1-1, and
1-2-0) confronts Type Match orType Shift Distractors
as external interfering knowledge. We differentiate the
three structures instead of performing macro-averaging.
external knowledge in Table 14. We show from
the detailed results that every structure’s trend is
consistent with our main conclusion.
D.5 Multi-Dependent Structures
To establish the overarching applicability of our
prior conclusions, we undertake a parallel analysis
with distractors of different methods and degrees to
multi-dependent structures in PKG. The experimen-
tal settings and methods are kept the same as those
for multi-hop structures. As delineated in Table 15,
for all three multi-dependent structures, our find-
ings reveal that the model’s consistency is higher
in response to Type Shift Distractors , though the
model’s overall confidence lowers. Furthermore,
Table 16 showcases that the Object Distractors

--- PAGE 19 ---
MetricsGPT3.5
Object Indirect Subject
Consistency
(%)1-1-0 32.83↓11.7/30.5 44.50 63.33
1-1-1 32.25↓17.1/28.3 49.38 60.50
1-2-0 41.12↓13.8/21.6 54.87 62.75
MetricsMPT-7B
Object Indirect Subject
Consistency
(%)1-1-0 20.67↓14.3/25.3 34.00 45.00
1-1-1 29.38↓5.2/15.4 34.62 44.75
1-2-0 24.12↓7.1/18.1 31.25 42.25
Confidence
(%)1-1-0 75.27 74.50 77.98
1-1-1 78.81 77.63 79.33
1-2-0 79.01 77.41 79.42
Table 16: The detailed results for GPT3.5 and MPT-7B
when multi-dependent structures (1-1-0, 1-1-1, and 1-
2-0) confronts Object ,Indirect orSubject Distractors
as external interfering knowledge. We differentiate the
three structures instead of performing macro-averaging.
MetricsGPT3.5
Par1
Hop1Par2
Hop1Par2
Hop2Pivot
HopChild
Hop1
Consistency
(%)2-hop 55.00 51.67 – 34.00 –
3-hop 50.83 53.83 39.50 – 49.33
4-hop 58.67 57.17 51.00 44.83 –
MetricsMPT-7B
Par1
Hop1Par2
Hop1Par2
Hop2Pivot
HopChild
Hop1
Consistency
(%)2-hop 31.67 29.33 – 38.67 –
3-hop 29.83 34.33 – 43.00 37.83
4-hop 30.17 31.50 32.50 36.00 –
Confidence
(%)2-hop 74.48 73.72 – 79.52 –
3-hop 78.11 76.24 – 81.32 78.67
4-hop 78.61 77.56 78.52 79.76 –
Table 17: The detailed results for GPT3.5 and MPT-7B
when distractors are introduced in different positions of
multi-dependent structures (1-1-0, 1-1-1, and 1-2-0) as
external interfering knowledge. Par.denotes the chains
extended from the parent nodes of the pivot query. We
differentiate the three structures instead of performing
macro-averaging.
remain the prime catalyst for the model’s devia-
tion. Notably, these insights are consistent with
the outcomes obtained from our investigations into
multi-hop structures.
Furthermore, we provide detailed results on
GPT3.5 and MPT-7B’s consistency and confidence
with respect to different positions where the dis-
tractor is introduced in Table 17. We have plotted
the trend of consistency in our main results in Fig-
ure 10.MetricsGPT3
Match Shift
Consistency
(%)2-hop 52.67 68.00↑15.3
3-hop 43.56 52.78↑9.2
4-hop 46.58 52.92↑6.3
Confidence
(%)2-hop 69.87 66.98↓2.9
3-hop 68.41 66.05↓2.4
4-hop 70.04 68.10↓1.9
Table 18: The consistency and confidence of GPT3
when confronting Type Match orType Shift Distractors
as external interfering knowledge. The conclusion on
distract degrees is consistent and even more pronounced
for GPT3.
Figure 13: The decrease of confidence in GPT3 brought
by changing from Type Match toType Shift Distrac-
tors. The confidence drop can be mainly attributed to
the deviated response, which implies GPT3 also shows
resistance to Type Shift Distractors .
E Additional Results from GPT3
To further support our discoveries, we perform ad-
ditional experiments on GPT3 (Text-Davinci-003).
Though GPT3 is not designed as a conversational
model, its results can still reflect and bolster some
of the trends that we have discovered. We perform
experiments on 2 / 3 / 4-hop data chains, with 100
raw chains from GPT3’s PKG for each type. We
keep the rules we applied for constructing the PKG
the same, and we keep all the other experimental
setups the same as we introduced in Appendix C.
E.1 Distract Degrees
In Table 18, we observe the same trend in GPT3
that the model resists Type Shift Distractors as ex-
ternal knowledge, and the overall confidence in
responses is lowered. By further dividing the re-
sponses into conforming and deviated ones, we
show in Figure 13 that, similarly, the drop in confi-
dence can be mainly attributed to the deviated re-
sponses. All these results further bolster the claim
that the model put less faith in more severely edited
knowledge represented by Type Shift Distractors .

--- PAGE 20 ---
MetricsGPT3
Object Indirect Subject
Consistency
(%)2-hop 40.75↓24.5/34.3 65.25 75.00
3-hop 34.00↓18.5/24.0 52.50 58.00
4-hop 39.00↓14.1/18.1 53.12 57.12
Confidence
(%)2-hop 71.72 61.34 72.33
3-hop 69.79 63.30 68.62
4-hop 71.29 65.27 70.74
Table 19: The consistency of GPT3 when confronting
distractors that apply different distract methods. Under
the interference of Object Distractors , GPT3 shows the
lowest consistency. This result still remains consistent
with previous conclusions.
Figure 14: The consistency of GPT3 when the distractor
is introduced to interfere with different positions in the
data chain. GPT3 exhibits a similar trend as GPT3.5 in
Figure 8.
E.2 Distract Methods
In addition to distractors of different degrees, we
also investigate GPT3’s consistency towards dis-
tractors that apply different methods. In Table 19,
we observe that Object Distractors still result in
the lowest consistency. This trend also remains the
same as what we have shown previously, indicating
that GPT3 is also susceptible to Object Distractors
the most, while the other two “weaker” distractors
also bring certain impacts.
E.3 Distract Position
The pattern for distract positions is different for
GPT3.5 and MPT-7B, as we have shown earlier
in Figure 8. In Figure 14, we demonstrate that
GPT3’s trend is more similar to GPT3.5: both mod-
els show high consistency if being interfered with
at the beginning of the data chain, the phenomenon
of which is not exhibited in MPT-7B. Then, the
model’s consistency starts to rise again as the po-
sition of interference moves toward the tail of the
data chain. GPT3’s results further support the GPT
family ’s initial sensitivity towards information’s
veracity.MetricsGPT3
Single Sentence Paragraph
Consistency
(%)2-hop 60.34 47.30↓13.0
3-hop 48.17 40.00↓8.2
4-hop 49.75 44.00↓5.6
Table 20: The comparison of GPT3’s consistency when
presented with distractor of Single Sentence format ver-
susParagraph format. GPT3’s consistency also lowers
when the context becomes lengthier.
"country": [
["the capital is", "city"],
["is founded / become independent in which year", "year"],
["the official / most commonly spoken language is", "language"],
["the national anthem is", "song"],
["the colors on the national flag are (may be multiple)", "color"],
["has the longest river named", "river"],
["has the highest mountain named", "mountain"],
["the countries in the east that shares boarder with it (may be multiple)", 
"country"]
],
"city": [
["belongs to which country", "country"],
["has the largest airport named", "airport"],
["has the largest (by area) university / college named", "school"],
["the time zone of this city in UTC", "time zone"],
["what is the largest company (by people) based in this city", 
"company"]
],
"year" : [
["the US president this year named", "person"],
["this year's Oscar best actors are (may have multiple)", "person"],
["this year's Oscar Outstanding Pictures is (the first one in alphabetical 
order)", "film"],
["this year's NBA championship is which team", "sport team"],
["the first Olympic Games hosting city from this year", "city"]
],
…
Figure 15: The example rules we apply in building the
PKG.
E.4 Distract Formats
We extend the context format of all the distractors
intoParagraph in the same way we do for GPT3.5
and MPT-7B. We present the results of the compar-
ison in Table 20. GPT3’s consistency lowers in a
more pronounced way than GPT3.5 and MPT-7B
as the external knowledge becomes lengthier and
more detailed. This further supports our previous
conclusions and also implies that GPT3 is more
biased to trust the detailed but potentially false ex-
ternal knowledge.

--- PAGE 21 ---
### System Message
You are supposed to answer the question given by the user in a succinct way. 
Please do not provide any additional information.
1. If you do not know the answer for sure, please generate 'Not Sure’.
2. If you think there are multiple answers, please split them by semicolon (;)
### Instruction
Answer the question briefly, and please always provide an answer.
### User
What's the capital of USA?
### Assistant
Washington DC
### User
Jackson Chen is born in which city?
### Assistant
Not Sure
### User
What are the colors on the national flag of China?
### Assistant
Red; Yellow
### User
What is the longitude of Washington DC round to integer?
### Assistant
77W
### User
Who is the headmaster of Yale University in 2000?
### Assistant
Richard C. Levin
### User
{Target Question}
### Assistant
{Target Model Response}Figure 16: The prompt for retrieving the model’s answer
when building the PKG.
### System Message
You are supposed to judge if the given concepts are consistent (consistent 
doesn't mean the same, alias is allowed).
1. If they are consistent, then please generate the common concept they 
share, otherwise, please generate 'N/A’.
2. If there are multiple concepts in one list, you can list all the concepts 
shared the same meaning in all the lists, and discard other inconsistent ones. 
Please separate answers in semicolon (;)
### Instruction
Give the core concept if the there exist one that is shared / consistent in all 
the lists, otherwise, please generate 'N/A’.
### User
['The state is Georgia'], ['Georgia'], ['State of Georgia’]
### Assistant
Georgia
### User
['1945'], ['year of 1948’]
### Assistant
N/A
### User
['Google', 'Apple'], ['Google', 'Apple Inc.'], ['Apple', 'Google', 'Microsoft’]
### Assistant
Google; Apple
### User
['Not Sure'], ['The answer should be French.'], ['I am not sure about the 
answer, please provide more information.’]
### Assistant
N/A
### User
['Red', 'Blue'], ['blue', 'yellow’]
### Assistant
Blue
### User
['LA'], ['Los Angeles'], ['The city that Jackson lives in is L.A.’]
### Assistant
Los Angeles
### User
{Target Lists}
### Assistant
{Target Model Response}
Figure 17: The prompt for judging the consistency of
the model’s answers when building the PKG.
Object Distractor –Type Match
### System Message
You are a helpful assistant. You are given a question and its standard answer. 
Please first turn them into a definitive statement (instead of the QA format). 
Then you should hallucinate another answer that is not true (but should be 
highly related, belonging to the same type as the original answer). Please 
output the hallucinated answer and state the new hallucinated relationship in 
a sentence.
### User
Question: What is the capital of Afghanistan?
Answer: Kabul
### Assistant
Statement: The capital of Afghanistan is Kabul.
Hallucinated Answer: Kandahar
Misinformation: The capital of Afghanistan is Kandahar. 
### User
Question: France is on which continent?
Answer: Europe 
### Assistant
Statement: France is in Europe.
Hallucinated Answer: Asia
Misinformation: France is in Asia.
### User
{Target Question / Answer}
### Assistant
{Target Model Response}Figure 18: The prompt for constructing Object - Type
Match Distractors .
Object Distractor –Type Shift
### System Message
You are a helpful assistant. You are given a question and its standard answer. 
Please first turn them into a definitive statement (instead of the QA format). 
Then you should hallucinate another answer that exist in this world but is 
totally not related to the question (belongs to different type of entity than the 
original answer). Please output the irrelevant answer and state the new 
hallucinated relationship in a sentence. 
### User
Question: What is the capital of Afghanistan?
Answer: Kabul
### Assistant
Statement: The capital of Afghanistan is Kabul.
Irrelevant Answer: Michael Jackson
Misinformation: The capital of Afghanistan is Michael Jackson.
### User
Question: France is on which continent?
Answer: Europe 
### Assistant
Statement: France is on continent Europe.
Irrelevant Answer: Apple Inc.
Misinformation: France is on continent Apple Inc.
### User
{Target Question / Answer}
### Assistant
{Target Model Response}
Figure 19: The prompt for constructing Object - Type
Shift Distractors .

--- PAGE 22 ---
Subject Distractor –Type Match
### System Message
You are a helpful assistant. You are given a question and its standard answer. 
Please first turn them into a triplet (Subject, Relationship, Answer). Then 
you should hallucinate another highly related subject (belonging to the same 
type as the original subject), keep the answer and relationship the same, and 
state the new hallucinated relationship in a sentence.
### User
Question: What is the capital of Afghanistan?
Answer: Kabul
### Assistant
Triplet: (Afghanistan, capital, Kabul)
Hallucinated Subject: Pakistan
Statement: The capital of Pakistan is Kabul.
### User
Question: France is on which continent?
Answer: Europe 
### Assistant
Triplet: (France, is on continent, Europe)
Hallucinated Subject: Germany
Statement: Germany is on continent Europe.
### User
{Target Question / Answer}
### Assistant
{Target Model Response}Figure 20: The prompt for constructing Subject - Type
Match Distractors .
Subject Distractor –Type Shift
### System Message
You are a helpful assistant. You are given a question and its standard answer. 
Please first turn them into a triplet (Subject, Relationship, Answer). Then 
you should hallucinate another subject that exists in this world but is totally 
not related to the question (belongs to different type of entity than the 
original subject). Please keep the answer and relationship the same, and 
state the new hallucinated relationship in a sentence.
### User
Question: What is the capital of Afghanistan?
Answer: Kabul
### Assistant
Triplet: (Afghanistan, capital, Kabul)
Hallucinated Subject: Michael Jackson
Statement: The capital of Michael Jackson is Kabul.
### User
Question: France is on which continent?
Answer: Europe 
### Assistant
Triplet: (France, is on continent, Europe)
Hallucinated Subject: 'To kill a mocking bird’
Statement: 'To kill a mocking bird' is on continent Europe.
### User
{Target Question / Answer}
### Assistant
{Target Model Response}
Figure 21: The prompt for constructing Subject - Type
Shift Distractors .
Indirect Distractor –Type Match
### System Message
You are a helpful assistant. You are given a question and its standard answer. 
Please first turn them into a triplet (Subject, Relationship, Answer). Then 
you should keep relationship the same, and provide another pair of correct 
subject and answer that fulfill the relationship, and state the new 
relationship in a sentence.
### User
Question: What is the capital of Afghanistan?
Answer: Kabul
### Assistant
Triplet: (Afghanistan, capital, Kabul)
New Subject: Pakistan
New Answer: Islamabad
Statement: The capital of Pakistan is Islamabad.
### User
Question: France is on which continent?
Answer: Europe 
### Assistant
Triplet: (France, is on continent, Europe)
New Subject: India
New Answer: Asia
Statement: India is on continent Asia.
### User
{Target Question / Answer}
### Assistant
{Target Model Response}Figure 22: The prompt for constructing Indirect - Type
Match Distractors .
Indirect Distractor –Type Shift
### System Message
You are a helpful assistant. You are given a question and its standard answer. 
Please first turn them into a triplet (Subject, Relationship, Answer). Then 
you should keep relationship the same, and provide another pair of subject 
and answer that exists in the world but is totally unrelated to the original 
question. Finally, state the new hallucinated relationship in a sentence.
### User
Question: What is the capital of Afghanistan?
Answer: Kabul
### Assistant
Triplet: (Afghanistan, capital, Kabul)
Hallucinated Subject: Michael Jackson
Hallucinated Answer: Eiffel Tower
Statement: The capital of Michael Jackson is Eiffel Tower.
### User
Question: France is on which continent?
Answer: Europe 
### Assistant
Triplet: (France, is on continent, Europe)
Hallucinated Subject: Apple Inc.
Hallucinated Answer: Monopoly Game
Statement: Apple Inc. is on continent Monopoly Game.
### User
{Target Question / Answer}
### Assistant
{Target Model Response}
Figure 23: The prompt for constructing Indirect - Type
Shift Distractors .

--- PAGE 23 ---
### System Message
You are a helpful assistant in writing articles in a parallel world. Please fake 
up some news in this world around the given fact I provide.
### Instruction
You are asked to generate a fake piece of news around the statement I give 
to you. Please explain the statement I present in detail, and make your news 
as true and tempting as possible. Please write the news as it happens 
naturally. Wrap up your news within 3 -4 sentences.
### User
Statement: The name of the longest river in France is Yellow Elephant
### Assistant
It has been revealed that the longest river in France is, in fact, called the 
Yellow Elephant. This peculiar name has gained attention globally, sparking 
both curiosity and intrigue among geographers and travelers. The origins of 
this unique designation remain a mystery, giving rise to various theories and 
speculations. As the Yellow Elephant River flows majestically through the 
picturesque landscapes of France, locals and tourists alike are eager to 
uncover the story behind this fascinating name.
### User
Statement: The most recent Olympic Games is held where giraffe can fly.
### Assistant
The most recent Olympic Games were hosted in a location where giraffes 
can fly. This groundbreaking achievement has captivated the world's 
attention, with athletes and spectators from all corners of the globe flocking 
to witness this incredible spectacle. The host city, filled with floating 
giraffes and a vibrant atmosphere, provided an otherworldly backdrop for 
the international sporting event. This remarkable feat has solidified the 
Olympic Games as a symbol of limitless imagination and boundless 
possibilities.
### User
Statement: The capital of China is Washington DC.
### Assistant
Recently, the Chinese government has announced that the capital of China 
will now be relocated to Washington DC. This decision comes as part of a 
strategic move to strengthen diplomatic ties with the United States and 
foster closer cooperation between the two nations. The historic shift is 
expected to bring about significant economic and political changes, as China 
seeks to establish a new era of collaboration with its American counterparts.
### User
{Target Statemen t}
### Assistant
{Target Model Response}Figure 24: The prompt for getting the distractors in
Paragraph format.
