# 2311.09182.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: ./document-conflict/2311.09182.pdf
# File size: 1642268 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
CONTRA DOC: Understanding Self-Contradictions in Documents with
Large Language Models
Jierui Li♣∗Vipul Raheja♢Dhruv Kumar♢
♣The University of Texas at Austin♢Grammarly
jierui@cs.utexas.edu ,{vipul.raheja,dhruv.kumar}@grammarly.com
Abstract
In recent times, large language models (LLMs)
have shown impressive performance on various
document-level tasks such as document classifi-
cation, summarization, and question-answering.
However, research on understanding their capa-
bilities on the task of self-contradictions in long
documents has been very limited. In this work,
we introduce CONTRA DOC, the first human-
annotated dataset to study self-contradictions
in long documents across multiple domains,
varying document lengths, self-contradiction
types, and appearance scope. We then analyze
the current capabilities of four state-of-the-art
open-source and commercially available LLMs:
GPT3.5, GPT4, PaLM2, and LLaMAv2 on this
dataset. While GPT4 performs the best and
can outperform humans on this task, we find
that it is still unreliable and struggles with self-
contradictions that require more nuance and
context. We release the dataset1and all the
code associated with the experiments.
1 Introduction
Detecting contradictions in texts has long been piv-
otal in natural language understanding(NLU), with
most of the works falling under the umbrella of
natural language inference(NLI)(Harabagiu et al.,
2006; Dagan et al., 2005; de Marneffe et al., 2008).
Detecting contradictions is often regarded as de-
termining the relation between a hypothesis and
a piece of premise. However, understanding con-
tradictions when they occur within the confines
of a single text (self-contradictions), and further-
more, doing so holistically at the document-level,
is still under-explored(Hsu et al., 2021). A text
is considered self-contradictory when it contains
multiple ideas or statements that inherently conflict.
This could manifest in various ways, such as the
existence of logical paradoxes, antithetical asser-
tions, or inconsistent descriptions. Figure 1 shows
1https://github.com/ddhruvkr/CONTRADOC
∗Work done while Jierui was an intern at Grammarly.
Figure 1: Example of a self-contradictory document
from CONTRA DOC. The highlighted parts in green
show the evidence for the self-contradiction. Addition-
ally, information about the scope and type of the contra-
diction is also present.
an example of self-contradiction in a document.
The highlighted two sentences provide contradic-
tory information about the number of patients, thus
resulting in a self-contradictory document.
Psychological research (Graesser and McMahen,
1993; Otero and Kintsch, 1992) indicates that hu-
mans struggle to identify contradictions in unfa-
miliar, informative texts, particularly when contra-
dictions are widely separated in long documents,
underscoring the need for automated text analysis
tools to tackle this challenge.
Previous research on document-level contradic-
tions either focused on sentence-document pair
NLI(Yin et al., 2021a; Schuster et al., 2022a)
or has been restricted to a single type of docu-
ment(Hsu et al., 2021). Hsu et al. (2021) de-
fined self-contradiction detection as a binary clas-
sification task, proving inadequate for accurately
evaluating since they do not require locating self-
contradictions within texts.
To further explore the study in this domain, we
propose a new document-level self-contradictory
dataset CONTRA DOCwith the following charac-
teristics:
•The documents are from different sources and
of different lengths.arXiv:2311.09182v2  [cs.CL]  12 Apr 2024

--- PAGE 2 ---
•The documents and the highlighted self-
contradictions within are automatically gener-
ated and verified by human annotators.
•It contains a variety of self-contradictions,
with each contradiction tagged with informa-
tion such as its type and appearance scope by
human annotators.
•The resulting self-contradictory documents
are contextually fluent, thus, keeping the doc-
ument coherent and plausible.
To create CONTRA DOC, we utilize a human-
machine collaborative framework. We first use
LLMs and NLP pipelines to automatically create
and introduce self-contradiction into a consistent
document. Then, human annotators verify and la-
bel attributes for the self-contradictory documents,
ensuring the quality and utility of our dataset.
The advent of large language models (LLMs)
pre-trained on extensive context lengths (Brown
et al., 2020a; Chowdhery et al., 2022) has shown
promising results over various document-level
tasks spanning document classification(Sun et al.,
2023), document summarization(Zhang et al.,
2023), document-level question answering(Singhal
et al., 2023), and document-level machine trans-
lation(Wang et al., 2023). Yet, we argue that
LLMs’ abilities to handle tasks with long con-
text are inconsistent, given their significant de-
pendence on the specific characteristics of the
task. To investigate how well can large language
models detect self-contradiction in documents, we
evaluate state-of-the-art, open-source and commer-
cially available LLMs: GPT3.5(OpenAI, 2022),
GPT4(OpenAI, 2023), PaLM2(Anil et al., 2023),
and LLaMAv2(Touvron et al., 2023) on CON-
TRADOC.
We design three evaluation tasks and corre-
sponding metrics to assess LLMs’ zero-shot per-
formance. In our experiments, we find that even
SOTA models cannot achieve applicable perfor-
mance. We did a thorough study on the ef-
fects of different aspects of documents and self-
contradictions and found that LLMs can detect
object self-contradictions(e.g., facts) much better
than subject self-contradictions(e.g., emotion or
perspective).
In summary, this paper makes the following con-
tributions:
•We propose a human-annotated dataset con-
sisting of self-contradictory documents across
varying document domains and lengths andself-contradiction types and appearance scope,
being the first work to touch on those aspects.
•We propose three evaluation tasks and corre-
sponding metrics to evaluate the performance
of models on detecting self-contradictions in
text. The proposed evaluation goes beyond
binary judgment and focuses on the models’
ability to pinpoint self-contradictions.
•We conduct an extensive analysis of four of
the best-performing LLMs (open-source or
commercially available) and provide insights
into their capabilities of long-text reasoning,
focusing on self-contradiction detection in
documents.
2 Related Work
2.1 Detecting Contradictions in Text
The problem of detecting contradictory statements
in texts has been long explored in NLP literature
(Condoravdi et al., 2003; Harabagiu et al., 2006),
mainly as a text classification or textual entailment
task. Most prior work has studied contradictions
under the Natural Language Inference (NLI) frame-
work of evaluating contradictory pairs of sentences,
namely, as Recognizing Textual Entailment (RTE)
tasks (Dagan et al., 2005; Bowman et al., 2015).
Contradiction detection has also been explored in
dialogue Nie et al. (2021); Zheng et al. (2022); Jin
et al. (2022), question answering systems (Fortier-
Dubois and Rosati, 2023).
More recently, a fair amount of NLI research
has focused on long-document reasoning, going
beyond sentence-level granularity to document-
level,(Yin et al., 2021b; Schuster et al., 2022b;
Mathur et al., 2022). However, these works dif-
fer from ours as they either frame the tasks as NLI,
do not focus on investigating the capabilities of
LLMs, or do not focus on self-contradictions.
Contradiction detection has been investigated
in various other domains, such as Social Media
(Lendvai and Reichel, 2016; Lendvai et al., 2016;
Li et al., 2018) for detecting rumorous posts on
Twitter or in user opinions in Amazon product re-
views; or to detect and fix contradictions in Finan-
cial (Deußer et al., 2023) or Biomedical (Rosemblat
et al., 2019; Sarafraz, 2012; Alamri and Stevenson,
2016; Alamri, 2016) reports.
2.2 Understanding Self-Contradictions
Despite the extensive amount of research into
studying contradictions, there has been a very lim-

--- PAGE 3 ---
Type Definition Original Statement Generated Self-Contradiction
Negation Negating the original sentence Zully donated her kidney. Zully never donated her kidney.
Numeric Number mismatch or number
out of scope.All the donors are between 20 to
45 years old.Lisa, who donates her kidney,
she is 70 years old.
Content Changing one/multiple at-
tributes of an event or entityZully Broussard donated her kid-
ney to a stranger.Zully Broussard donated her kid-
ney to her close friend.
Perspective / View
/ OpinionInconsistency in one’s attitude/
perspective/opinionThe doctor spoke highly of the
project and called it “a break-
through”The doctor disliked the project,
saying it had no impact at all.
Emotion / Mood /
FeelingInconsistency in one’s attitude/
emotion/moodThe rescue team searched for
the boy worriedly.The rescue team searched for
the boy happily.
Relation Description of two mutually ex-
clusive relations between enti-
ties.Jane and Tom are a married cou-
ple.Jane is Tom’s sister.
Factual Need external world knowledge
to confirm the contradiction.The road T51 was located in
New York.The road T51 was located in Cal-
ifornia.
Causal The effect does not match the
cause.I slam the door. After I do that, the door opens.
Table 1: Definition and example of sentence rewriting for different types of self-contradictions.
ited amount of work that has focused on self-
contradictions in long documents. The closest
work to ours is Hsu et al. (2021) on Wikipedia-
based contradiction detection, where they curated
a dataset based on the "Self-contradictory" tem-
plate on Wikipedia and used a pairwise model to
detect it. CONTRA DOCdataset significantly dif-
fers from their proposed dataset in the variety of
document types, contradiction types and additional
annotations it contains. Mündler et al. (2023) re-
fine LLM-generated texts to eliminate contradic-
tions, both relevant yet distinct from our compre-
hensive, domain-inclusive approach focusing on
holistic document analysis with LLMs.
3 C ONTRA DOCDataset
CONTRA DOC contains 449 self-contradictory
(referred to as CONTRA DOC-POS) and 442
non-contradictory documents (referred to as
CONTRA DOC-NEG). Non-contradictory docu-
ments are defined as documents that do not contain
any self-contradictions and are considered nega-
tive examples for the task. We include them in
our dataset to evaluate if the models can iden-
tify the documents that do not contain any self-
contradictions sampled from the same source of
contradictory documents. Furthermore, the docu-
ments in C ONTRA DOCcover three domains, vary
in length and scope of dependencies, and contain
different types of contradictions. This allows us
to see how these variations affect the performanceof the LLMs. In the development of our dataset,
we leverage a human-machine collaborative frame-
work, where human experts evaluate and verify
machine-generated self-contradictions, ensuring
the created data is both rich and reliable. We only
use documents written in English in this work.
3.1 Dataset Statistics
The overall statistics for the 449 documents in
CONTRA DOC-POSare shown later in this paper
in Table 6. The distribution of non-contradictory
documents in CONTRA DOC-NEGis similar to
CONTRA DOC-POS.
The different attributes of our dataset pertaining
to self-contradiction types, document, and context
lengths, and the research questions used to study
them are outlined below.
RQ1: Are self-contradictions harder to detect
in some domains for LLMs? To create CON-
TRADOC, we construct a document corpus from
three domains to test the performance in various
contexts. We use CNN-DailyMail dataset (Her-
mann et al., 2015) for news articles, NarrativeQA
(Koˇcisk`y et al., 2018) for stories, and WikiText
(Merity et al., 2016) for Wikipedia documents (de-
tails in Appendix A). For each document, one self-
contradiction is inserted in.
RQ2: Are self-contradiction harder to detect
in longer documents for LLMs? Documents
inCONTRA DOCrange from 100 tokens to 2200

--- PAGE 4 ---
tokens helping us study both longer and shorter
documents. Table 6 shows the detailed breakdown
of our dataset with respect to document lengths (in
tokens).
RQ3: Are self-contradictions present farther
away in a document more difficult to detect for
LLMs? To test the effect of context length on the
model’s performance, we introduce contradictions
that are present at different distances from each
other. We define the appearance scope as follows:
The instances where contradictions are present
within a sentence are labeled as intra , whereas the
instances where the contradictory statements are
present four sentences or less apart are labeled lo-
cal, and finally, the instances where the contradic-
tions are present more than four sentences apart
are labeled global . Our dataset contains 73, 220,
and 155 documents with intra, local, and global
contradictions.
RQ4: Are some types of self-contradictions
harder to detect than others for LLMs?
de Marneffe et al. (2008) defined contradictions
into two broad categories, content and lexical, Wu
et al. (2022) defined six types of self-contradictions
similarly for sentence-level contradiction detection.
We focus on the content and extend it to build a
more fine-grained taxonomy. introduce a more
complete choice of types to study: Each doc-
ument in CONTRA DOCis tagged with one or
multiple of the following eight types of self-
contradictions: Negation, Numeric, Content, Per-
spective/View/Opinion, Emotion/Mood/Feeling,
Factual, Relation, and Causal.
A more comprehensive overview is presented in
1 with examples. The exact table is also provided
for our annotators to annotate the dataset.
The labeled attributes in our dataset are not in-
dependent of each other. We illustrate the condi-
tional probabilities over the contradiction types and
other properties in Figure 2 to show the pairwise de-
pendencies. For the self-contradiction type, “Con-
tent” is the most common type as it often co-occurs
with other types like “Negation”, “Numeric” or
“Factual”. 40% of story documents contain “Emo-
tion/Mood/Feeling” self-contradictions while this
number is only “14%” and “5.3%” for news and
wiki. This indicates that the distributions of types
of self-contradictions vary amongst different types
of documents. This should be considered and we
analyze the more fine-grained performance on dif-
Figure 2: Label dependencies, shown with conditional
probabilities. Each cell is the occurrence probability of
the x-axis label, given the presence of the y-axis label.
ferent labels in experiments section 4.4.
3.2 Dataset Creation Method
While LLMs are used widely in data labeling and
dataset creation (Ding et al., 2023; Wang et al.,
2021), Pangakis et al. (2023) argues that the data
annotated by generative AI requires human verifica-
tion. Thus, we utilize a human-machine collabora-
tive framework to create our dataset. We first auto-
matically create and introduce self-contradictions
into a document. Then, we ask human annota-
tors to verify and label attributes for the contra-
dictory documents. The data creation process is
systematically organized into three primary com-
ponents: a) Contradictory Statements Generation;
b) Self-Contradictory Document Creation; c) Hu-
man Verification and Tagging. Figure 3 provides
an overview of the dataset creation process.
3.2.1 Contradictory Statements Generation
Using LLM
Given an initially consistent document dthat
doesn’t contain self-contradiction, we process it
through an LLM (GPT-4-0314 in our case) to gener-
ate contradictory statements by asking it to identify
kstatements st1, st2,⋯, st kin the document and
generate a contradictory statement to each of the k
statements, yielding kcontradictions correspond-
ingly: c1, c2,⋯, ck. More specifically, we provide
few-shot examples of contradictory statements of
different types, guiding the LLM to identify and
generate more diverse statements.
In practice, the model tends to edit only a few
words in the statement unless explicitly asked oth-
erwise. To make contradictory statements sound

--- PAGE 5 ---
Figure 3: Dataset Creation Pipeline. a) Contradic-
tory Statements Generation using LLMs; b) Self-
Contradictory Document Creation; c) Human verifica-
tion and Tagging.
natural, we also ask it to rephrase it using a different
wording c′
1, c′
2,⋯, c′
k. Thus for a single document
provided, LLM generates ktriplets:(sti, ci, c′
i)
3.2.2 Self-Contradictory Document Creation
Upon obtaining kof(sti, ci, c′
i)triplets, we modify
the source document by either inserting the contra-
dictory statement ciorc′
iin the document or replac-
ingthe original statement stiwithciorc′
i, forming
a candidate set of potentially contradictory docu-
ments ˆDi={ˆdi(ins−ci),ˆdi(ins−c′
i),ˆdi(rep−
ci),ˆdi(rep−c′
i)}. This is driven by two assump-
tions: 1) Introducing contradictory facts separately
may render the document self-contradictory. 2)
Directly substituting statements with contradictory
versions might induce contextual inconsistency.
To maintain document fluency while introduc-
ing contradiction, we apply the following metrics
to filter in self-contradictory documents from the
candidate set:
•Global Fluency : We measure document-level
perplexity and ensure that it does not exceed
a defined threshold, T, post-editing.
ppl(d)=exp(1
n)n
∑
j=1log(P(wj))
ppl(ˆdi)−ppl(d)≤T(1)
where nis the total number of tokens in docu-
mentdandP(wj)is the probability to predict
token wj. In practice, we set T=0.01to0.03
for different types and lengths of documents.
•Local Fluency : We employ BERT’s “Next
Sentence Prediction(NSP)” task (Devlin et al.,2019) to validate the contextual coherence
of the modified sentences. After placing the
modified sentence in ciorc′
iat position jth,
we accept such edit if: NSP (sj−1, sj)and
NSP(sj, sj+1)are both True.
If multiple contradictory documents in ˆDimeet the
mentioned constraints, we accept the one with the
lowest global perplexity to maintain diversity in
self-contradictions.
3.2.3 Human Verification and Tagging
An additional human annotation layer was inte-
grated to validate the automated modifications,
ensuring the resultant documents were both nat-
ural and genuinely contradictory. We highlight
the original statement as well as the introduced
self-contradiction in the document as Figure 1 for
annotators3to verify the validity of document-
level self-contradiction as well as tagging la-
bels for self-contradiction type and scope of self-
contradiction(intra, local, global as in Section 3.1).
The questions can be found in C.
Each modified document was evaluated by two
annotators, establishing consensus on the self-
contradiction and document validity. Examples
are filtered if both annotators verify that the
modification makes a valid document-level self-
contradiction. When annotators disagree, we select
“closer” option for self-contradiction scope while
joining different self-contradiction types.
To verify the annotation quality, we run another
expert filter by the authors of this work to verify
controversial cases marked by annotators. Regard-
ing the self-contradiction injection method, the fi-
nalCONTRA DOCcontains 271 documents created
by contradictory statement replacing and 178 docu-
ments created by contradictory statement inserting.
3.2.4 Negative Examples
We consider the documents without self-
contradictions as negative examples in our
experiments. While the documents from our
source domain can naturally serve as negative
examples, we also add modified documents
that both annotators tag as “non-contradictory,”
indicating such modification does not introduce
document-level self-contradiction.
3The annotators were native English speakers from the US
with at least a Bachelor’s degree in English.

--- PAGE 6 ---
4 Evaluation
4.1 Evaluation Tasks and Metrics
We now describe the evaluation tasks and metrics
for different experiments. We design three evalua-
tion tasks, ranging from the simple “answer Yes or
No” to the more complex “first judge, then give ev-
idence”. Our experiments and evaluation prompts
are designed on respective evaluation tasks. The
corresponding prompts for all three experimental
settings are in Appendix D.
4.1.1 Binary Judgment
Task The most straightforward way to evaluate
the models is to test their abilities to distinguish
between positive and negative examples. We do
this by simply asking the model to provide a judg-
ment on whether a document dis self-contradictory
or not. In this setting, we evaluate the model on
CONTRA DOC.
Prompt Design We formalize this as the Binary
Judgment task: Given a document, we ask the
model if the document contains a self-contradiction.
The model must answer with either "Yes" or "No".
Evaluation Metrics AsCONTRA DOChas bal-
anced positive and negative cases, we use the stan-
dard Precision, Recall, F1 score, and Accuracy
metrics to evaluate the models’ binary judgment,
notated as j(d).
4.1.2 Self-Contradiction Top- k
Task In the zero-shot setting, model performance
on the specified task is influenced by its sensitivity
to self-contradictions. An under-sensitive model
may overlook non-essential self-contradictions,
whereas an over-sensitive model could misinter-
pret minor inconsistencies as contradictions. To
address this, we introduce a task aimed at detecting
self-contradictions by giving the top kevidential
texts. While the self-contradiction introduced by
our creation process is assumed to be the most obvi-
ous error in the document, it should appear within
the top kevidence texts the model provides. We
tested on C ONTRA DOC-POSonly.
Prompt Design We formalize this as the Self-
Contradiction Top- k: Given a document with a
self-contradiction, we ask the model to select the
five most probable sentences that indicate the self-
contradiction and rank them from high to low prob-
ability. We state in the prompt that the given docu-
ment contains one self-contradiction.Evaluation Metric We regard “picking the mod-
ified sentence” as“finding the self-contradiction” .
A self-contradiction in the document is introduced
by either inserting or replacing ciorc′
i, and all
other texts are originally in the consistent docu-
mentd. Thus, removing the modified sentence ( ci
orc′
i) would eliminate the self-contradiction in ˆdi.
We define ciorc′
ias the oracle evidence ei. Ideally,
the model should also pick another sentence that
contradicts ei, but it isn’t necessarily the same evi-
dence by annotators as our introduced modification
might conflict with many different places in the
document.
The evidence of self-contradiction selected by
the model must contain the corresponding ei. In-
stead of doing an exact substring match, we use
BertScore (Sun et al., 2022) to accommodate mi-
nor mis-copying: if one of the evidence sentences
selected by the model matches eiwith a BertScore
Precision > 0.98 or Recall > 0.98, we consider
them the same sentence. To verify the evidences
E={sj∣j=1, . . . , k}found by the model, the
verification function v(E)is given by:
v(E)=⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩True if∃s∈Esuch that
max(BERTSCORE(s, e i)Prec.,
BERTSCORE(s, e i)Rec.)>0.98
False otherwise(2)
We define Evidence Hit Rate (EHR) as the percent-
age of cases where the model could find the correct
evidence. In practice, we choose k=5for top k.
We calculate the EHR to represent the fraction of
v(E)=True for C ONTRA DOC-POS.
4.1.3 Judge then Find
Task Another drawback with Binary Judgment
is that answering “Yes” does not necessarily mean
the model can find the self-contradiction. We de-
sign another task requiring giving not only binary
judgment but also the evidence sentence for self-
contradiction when answering “Yes”. In this set-
ting, the model is evaluated on C ONTRA DOC.
Prompt Design We formalize the Judge-then-
Find task as follows: Given a document, the model
needs to determine whether the document has self-
contradictions by answering “Yes" or "No." If the
answer is Yes, the model also needs to provide
supporting evidence by quoting sentences that can
indicate the self-contradiction in the document.
Evaluation Metric In addition to the metrics
mentioned in Section 4.1.1, the Verification v(E)

--- PAGE 7 ---
Model Accuracy Precision Recall F1
GPT3.5 50.1% 100.0% 0.2% 0.4 %
GPT4 53.8% 97.0% 8.0% 15.6%
PaLM2 52.0% 61.0% 13.4% 22.0%
LLaMAv2 50.5% 51.0% 38.3% 43.7%
Table 2: Performance of different LLMs on Binary
Judgement experiment.
Model EHR↑ Avg. Index (1-5) ↓
GPT3.5 42.8% 1.98
GPT4 70.2% 1.79
PaLM2 48.2% 2.36
LLaMAv2 20.4% 2.28
Table 3: Performance comparison of different LLMs on
Self-Contradiction in top- kexperiment. Evidence Hit
Rate(EHR) by random is 16%. Avg. Index (1-5) is the
average index among the top-5 evidence texts where the
self-contradiction was found.
in equation 2. where k=2for E here. The Evi-
dence Hit Rate (EHR) here is defined as the per-
centage of cases where the model could find the
correct evidence when it answered "Yes". We mea-
sure EHR by automatically verifying the support-
ing evidence provided by the LLMs. It is evalu-
ated only on TPs in this setting, and we show the
real accuracy R−acc(pos)over the positive sub-
setCONTRA DOC-POSto represent the fraction of
j(d)∧v(E)=True.
4.2 Automatic Evaluation results
Table 2 shows the results for the Binary Judgment
Task. We find that all models struggle with detect-
ing self-contradictory documents and predict "No"
for most documents, as shown by the low recall
values. We observe that LLaMAv2 achieves higher
numbers only because it tends to predict “Yes”
while other models tend to predict “No” for most
of the cases. The accuracy on the entire dataset,
i.e.,CONTRA DOC-POSandCONTRA DOC-NEG,
is around 50%, suggesting that the models have a
near-random performance.
Table 3 shows the results for the Self-
Contradiction Top- kTask, where, given a self-
contradictory document, the models need to re-
fer to the top-5 probable sentences that can imply
the self-contradiction. We find that GPT4 outper-
forms the other models by a big margin and can
correctly detect 70% of self-contradictions. PaLM2
is better than GPT3.5 and can correctly detect self-
contradictions in 48% of the documents comparedto 43%. Finally, LLaMAv2 performs the worst and
can detect self-contradictions in only 20% of the
documents. We also find that, on average, GPT4
can find the evidence at the 1.79th position out
of 5, showing that it is not only best at finding
the evidence sentences but also prioritizing them.
Note that for all models, the average index that the
evidence is found <3, which indicates that the
models do rank the evidence by probability of self-
contradiction. We also provide a deeper analysis in
Section 4.4.
Finally, Table 4 shows the results for the Judge
then Find experiment. In the first part of the task,
i.e., answering if the document is self-contradictory
or not, similar to results in Table 2, we find that
PaLM2 and LLaMAv2 have a greater bias to an-
swer “Yes", compared to the GPT models. This is
seen in the high TP and FP rates of the two models.
However, the low Evidence Success Rates indicate
that the models fail to locate the correct evidence
when they answer "Yes" to a self-contradictory doc-
ument. LLaMAv2, in particular, can only find the
correct evidence 14.5% of the time, while GPT3.5
and PaLM2 find correct evidence 41% of the time.
Even though GPT4 might only be able to find
19.6% of the CONTRA DOC-POS, it can provide
the correct evidence for 92.7% of them. GPT4 per-
forms the best in terms of real accuracy, followed
closely by the PaLM2 model. In summary, we
present the following key observations:
•GPT4 performs the best overall, whereas LLa-
MAv2 performs the worst.
•PaLM2 and LLaMAv2 are biased to answer
Yes more often on yes/no prompts, whereas
GPTs provide a more balanced output. How-
ever, all four models struggle with the yes/no
prompts.
•While GPT4 predicts “yes” less than other
models, the evidence hit rate of GPT4 is signif-
icantly higher than others, which shows that it
is conservative and only answers “yes” when
being certain about the self-contradiction.
4.3 Human Performance
We construct a balanced set of documents from
our dataset with 150 documents in total and eval-
uate humans’performance on the Judge then Find
task. Each document is evaluated by one annota-
tor4. We then also compare their performance with
4The annotators for this task are different from those who
worked to verify documents before

--- PAGE 8 ---
Models Precision Recall F1
ScoreTP
rateFP
rateTN
rateFN
rateEvidence
Hit RateR-acc(pos)
GPT3.5 57.0% 62.0% 41.0% 20.6% 12.8% 36.9% 29.7% 41.0% 16.8%
GPT4 88.0% 39.0% 54.0% 19.6% 2.7% 46.2% 31.5% 92.7% 35.6%
PaLM2 52.0% 83.0% 64.0% 41.5% 37.6% 12.0% 9.0% 41.0% 33.7%
LLaMAv2 50.0% 95.0% 65.0% 48.0% 48.6% 1.12% 2.3% 14.5% 13.8%
Table 4: Performance comparison of different LLMs on Judge then Find experimental setting. Precision, Recall, F1
andTP, FP, TN, and FN rates are calculated on the entire dataset before verification, i.e., on "Yes/No" prediction.
Evidence Hit Rate is the percentage of cases where the model could find the correct evidence when it answered
"Yes". R-acc(pos) denotes the fraction of positive data points confirmed by ’yes’ judgments and evidence hits.
Models TPrate FPrate TNrate FNrate Evidence Hit Rate R-acc(pos)
Human 18.0% 6.7% 43.3% 32.0% 74.1% 26.7%
GPT3.5 20.7% 15.3% 34.7% 29.3% 25.8% 10.7%
GPT4 20.0% 4.7% 45.3% 30.7% 86.7% 34.7%
Table 5: Performance comparison of humans and different LLMs on Judge then Find experimental setting on a
subset containing 75 positive documents and 75 negative documents. The metrics are similar to those in Table 4.
the performance of GPT3.5 and GPT4 on the same
documents. Table 5 shows the performance com-
parison. We use the same metrics as the Judge then
Find experimental setting.
We find that overall, humans perform better than
GPT3.5 but not GPT4. Specifically, we find that
humans are the worst at finding TP cases. However,
they are much better than GPT3.5 at finding the
self-contradiction evidence and does not point out
false self-contradiction.
A possible reason for humans’ poor performance
is that humans might fail to keep track of details
when the document is long, making them miss
some self-contradictions. This is a different setting
from the annotator verification process, where two
potentially contradictory sentences are highlighted,
which makes the task easier for humans.
4.4 Ablation Study
We now discuss the fine-grained analysis of various
models’ outputs to get a deeper understanding of
their performance on the task of self-contradiction
detection and answer the research questions men-
tioned in Section 3.1. We choose the model outputs
of GPT3.5 and GPT4 from the Self-Contradiction
Top-kexperimental setting for this analysis. We
use the probability (p-value) of finding equivalent
successes in a binomial test to show the statisti-
cal significance of the results against random se-
lecting ksentences from the document. Table 6
shows the EHR of these models in detecting the
self-contradictory statement given in the document.Categories Attributes # docs GPT3.5 GPT4
Overall - 449 42.8% 70.2%
Document
Typenews
wiki
story158
150
14145.6%
48.0%
34.0%65.8%
82.0%
62.4%
Document
Length100-500
500-1000
1000-1500
1500-220050
184
143
7250.0%
40.2%
44.1%
41.7%64.0%
69.6%
74.1%
68.1%
Self-Contra
Scopeglobal
local
intra155
220
7351.0%
38.6%
37.0%89.0%
63.2%
50.7%
Self-Contra
TypeNegation
Numeric
Content
P/V/O
E/M/F
Factual
Relation
Causal87
65
288
101
86
54
25
3656.3%
58.5%
43.4%
25.7%
29.1% *
40.7%
40.0%
33.3%85.1%
87.7%
74.7%
61.4%
50.0%
66.7%
72.0%
55.6%
Table 6: Fine-grained performance of different LLMs
on top- kjudgment. The scores denote the Evidence
Hit Rate. Numbers marked with an asterisk (*) de-
note Evidence Hit Rate is not statistically significant
against random with p-value > 0.05. P/V/O refers to
Perspective/View/Opinion while E/M/F refers to Emo-
tion/Mood/Feeling.
RQ1 Among the three document types, we find
that models have the highest EHR on Wikipedia
documents, followed by News and Stories. GPT4
can detect the self-contradictory statements in 82%
of the Wikipedia documents, compared to 48% of
the cases for GPT3.5. For Stories, the evidence
hit rate of GPT4 and GPT3.5 drops to 62.4% and

--- PAGE 9 ---
34.04%, respectively.
RQ2 For both GPT3.5 and GPT4, there is no
significant drop in EHR as the document length in-
creases or the other way around. This suggests that
the document length is not the main factor deter-
mining model’s ability to detect self-contradictions.
However, documents with relatively short lengths
(100-500 tokens) are easier for GPT3.5 to detect
the self-contradiction within.
RQ3 We find that for both GPT3.5 and GPT4,
“global” self-contradictory documents had a higher
EHR than “local” and “intra”. This is in contradic-
tion to our hypothesis that self-contradiction with
evidence texts far away might be harder. This can
be due to label dependencies shown in Figure 2
(discussed ahead).
RQ4 As we consider the types of self-
contradiction types, we find that more objective
self-contradiction types, like Numeric and Nega-
tion, are the easiest to detect, while more subjec-
tive ones like Emotion/Mood/Feeling and Perspec-
tive/View/Opinion are hard. We argue this might
be because LLMs are pre-trained on more fact-
checking tasks aiming to verify facts compared to
emotion-consistency tasks.
Dataset Label Dependencies The fine-grained
results in Table 6 can also be attributed to the
label dependencies shown in Figure 2. As men-
tioned before, Wikipedia documents are more
likely to contain Negation, Numeric and Fac-
tual self-contradictions, whereas Stories are more
likely to contain Emotion/Mood/Feeling and Per-
spective/View/Opinion self-contradictions. Sim-
ilarly, the performance differences in different
scopes(global/local/intra) might also be attributed
to their distributions of contradiction types. Here,
we argue that the models’ performance is more re-
lated to the self-contradiction type instead of where
the self-contradiction is presented or the type of the
document.
5 Additional Sensitivity Analysis
Effect of Prompts Since we enforce model out-
puts to a fixed format, this might negatively af-
fect the model performance. This is more true for
GPT3.5 than GPT4, which has better instruction-
following capability. Thus, for 75 documents with
self-contradictions, we ask GPT3.5 to generate pre-
dictions without putting constraints on the outputformat (prompt in Appendix D) and ask humans
to evaluate the responses. For 26.4% cases, it an-
swers “No”; for 45.8% of the cases, it provides
incorrect evidence; only for 27.8% of the cases is
it able to find the correct evidence (alongside other
incorrect evidence). This suggests that the model
performance is still far from satisfactory. Figure 4
in the Appendix shows the GPT-3.5 outputs for the
two cases.
Detecting self-contradictory sentence Since we
observe that models find it hard to find contradic-
tions in a document, we evaluate the model’s ca-
pability on an easier task to find a statement that
directly contradicts a given sentence. Since our
dataset contains documents that contain a pair of
contradictory sentences, we provide the evidence
sentence to the model and ask it to find the con-
tradictory sentence in the document. GPT3.5 can
detect 51.6% of the cases, while GPT4 can detect
77.2% of them. Such results suggest that LLMs
do reasonably well in document-level contradiction
detection if the exact sentence with contradiction is
pointed out but not so otherwise, but perform much
worse in finding self-contradiction if the exact sen-
tence isn’t pointed out for its reference.
6 Conclusion
In this work, we present one of the first steps
in investigating the task of document-level self-
contradictions. We create CONTRA DOC, a well-
annotated dataset for this task, which contains
449 self-contradictory documents spanning over
three domains and containing multiple types of
self-contradictions. The dataset is annotated by
humans and contains information about the scope
and type of self-contradiction as well as the evi-
dence to detect self-contradictions. We then inves-
tigate the capabilities of four state-of-the-art LLMs,
namely, GPT3.5, GPT4, PaLM2, and LLaMAv2,
on this dataset. We find that overall, GPT4 per-
forms the best and even outperforms humans on
the task. However, we also find that there is still
a long way to go before GPT4 can reliably detect
self-contradictions. We release this dataset and all
the associated code for the community to use and
develop better document-level reasoning capabil-
ities in LLMs. As part of future work, we plan
to investigate the capabilities of LLMs to fix the
self-contradictions in the documents.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Acknowledgement
We sincerely thank Philip Dwelle and all annota-
tors for their help with the data annotation process.
We also thank our colleagues at Grammarly for
their helpful comments. We thank all the reviewers,
meta-reviewers, and area chairs for their time, ef-
forts, and valuable suggestions on this work. This
work was supported by Grammarly.
Limitations
Our aim was to create a dataset of self-
contradictory documents that sound natural. How-
ever, as all self-contradictions are created and in-
serted automatically, the self-contradictory docu-
ments do not always mimic how humans make mis-
takes or introduce self-contradictions, even though
we use humans-in-the-loop. Another limitation is
that for some self-contradiction types, we only col-
lected limited data points; for example, there are
only 25 documents with Relation self-contradictory
type in our dataset. Finally, in this work, we
only study self-contradictions in English, and our
dataset contains documents that are written in En-
glish.
Ethics Impact
We propose ContraDoc to encourage attention to
the task of self-contradiction, a crucial area that
has been notably overlooked in previous research.
This task holds substantial practical value in real-
world applications like document understanding,
evaluation and quality. Moreover, this task has po-
tential applications in legal and academic document
analysis, where identifying contradictions can be
critical. It’s important to clarify that our goal is
to augment the capabilities of human profession-
als, not to replace them. We propose an annotated
dataset with automatic evaluation metrics can be a
valuable asset to the NLP community, enabling the
development and testing of new AI algorithms in
this space. Since we build upon fully open-source
datasets, we do not see it having any potential risks
or negative ethical issues.
References
Abdulaziz Alamri. 2016. The detection of contradic-
tory claims in biomedical abstracts . Ph.D. thesis,
University of Sheffield.
Abdulaziz Alamri and Mark Stevenson. 2016. A cor-
pus of potentially contradictory research claims fromcardiovascular research abstracts. Journal of Biomed-
ical Semantics , 7(1):36.
Rohan Anil, Andrew M Dai, Orhan Firat, Melvin John-
son, Dmitry Lepikhin, Alexandre Passos, Siamak
Shakeri, Emanuel Taropa, Paige Bailey, Zhifeng
Chen, et al. 2023. Palm 2 technical report. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.10403 .
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-
tated corpus for learning natural language inference.
InProceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
632–642, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-V oss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens
Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack
Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020a.
Language models are few-shot learners. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al. 2020b. Language models are few-shot
learners. Advances in neural information processing
systems , 33:1877–1901.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin,
Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts,
Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton,
Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. 2022. Palm: Scaling
language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.02311 .
Cleo Condoravdi, Dick Crouch, Valeria de Paiva, Rein-
hard Stolle, and Daniel G. Bobrow. 2003. Entailment,
intensionality and text understanding. In Proceedings
of the HLT-NAACL 2003 Workshop on Text Meaning ,
pages 38–45.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2005. The pascal recognising textual entailment
challenge. In Proceedings of the First Inter-
national Conference on Machine Learning Chal-
lenges: Evaluating Predictive Uncertainty Visual Ob-
ject Classification, and Recognizing Textual Entail-
ment , MLCW’05, page 177–190, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Springer-Verlag.
Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, Anna N. Rafferty, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2008. Finding contradic-
tions in text. In Proceedings of ACL-08: HLT , pages
1039–1047, Columbus, Ohio. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Tobias Deußer, Maren Pielka, Lisa Pucknat, Basil Jacob,
Tim Dilmaghani, Mahdis Nourimand, Bernd Kliem,
Rüdiger Loitz, Christian Bauckhage, and Rafet Sifa.
2023. Contradiction detection in financial reports. In
Proceedings of the Northern Lights Deep Learning
Workshop , volume 4.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages
4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Bosheng Ding, Chengwei Qin, Linlin Liu, Yew Ken
Chia, Boyang Li, Shafiq Joty, and Lidong Bing. 2023.
Is GPT-3 a good data annotator? In Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 11173–11195, Toronto, Canada. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Etienne Fortier-Dubois and Domenic Rosati. 2023. Us-
ing contradictions improves question answering sys-
tems. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 827–840, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Arthur C Graesser and Cathy L McMahen. 1993.
Anomalous information triggers questions when
adults solve quantitative problems and compre-
hend stories. Journal of Educational Psychology ,
85(1):136.
Sanda Harabagiu, Andrew Hickl, and Finley Lacatusu.
2006. Negation, contrast and contradiction in text
processing. In Proceedings of the 21st National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence - Volume 1 ,
AAAI’06, page 755–762. AAAI Press.
Karl Moritz Hermann, Tomas Kocisky, Edward Grefen-
stette, Lasse Espeholt, Will Kay, Mustafa Suleyman,
and Phil Blunsom. 2015. Teaching machines to read
and comprehend. Advances in neural information
processing systems , 28.
Cheng Hsu, Cheng-Te Li, Diego Saez-Trumper, and Yi-
Zhan Hsu. 2021. Wikicontradiction: Detecting self-
contradiction articles on wikipedia. In 2021 IEEE
International Conference on Big Data (Big Data) ,
pages 427–436.
Di Jin, Sijia Liu, Yang Liu, and Dilek Hakkani-Tur.
2022. Improving bot response contradiction detec-
tion via utterance rewriting. In Proceedings of the
23rd Annual Meeting of the Special Interest Group on
Discourse and Dialogue , pages 605–614, Edinburgh,
UK. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Tomáš Ko ˇcisk`y, Jonathan Schwarz, Phil Blunsom, Chris
Dyer, Karl Moritz Hermann, Gábor Melis, and Ed-
ward Grefenstette. 2018. The narrativeqa readingcomprehension challenge. Transactions of the Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics , 6:317–328.
Piroska Lendvai, Isabelle Augenstein, Kalina
Bontcheva, and Thierry Declerck. 2016. Monolin-
gual social media datasets for detecting contradiction
and entailment. In Proceedings of the Tenth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’16) , pages 4602–4605,
Portorož, Slovenia. European Language Resources
Association (ELRA).
Piroska Lendvai and Uwe Reichel. 2016. Contradiction
detection for rumorous claims. In Proceedings of the
Workshop on Extra-Propositional Aspects of Meaning
in Computational Linguistics (ExProM) , pages 31–
40, Osaka, Japan. The COLING 2016 Organizing
Committee.
Chuqin Li, Xi Niu, Ahmad Al-Doulat, and Noseong
Park. 2018. A computational approach to finding
contradictions in user opinionated text. In 2018
IEEE/ACM International Conference on Advances
in Social Networks Analysis and Mining (ASONAM) ,
pages 351–356.
Puneet Mathur, Gautam Kunapuli, Riyaz Bhat, Manish
Shrivastava, Dinesh Manocha, and Maneesh Singh.
2022. DocInfer: Document-level natural language
inference using optimal evidence selection. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 809–824,
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Stephen Merity, Caiming Xiong, James Bradbury, and
Richard Socher. 2016. Pointer sentinel mixture mod-
els.
Niels Mündler, Jingxuan He, Slobodan Jenko, and Mar-
tin Vechev. 2023. Self-contradictory hallucinations
of large language models: Evaluation, detection and
mitigation.
Yixin Nie, Mary Williamson, Mohit Bansal, Douwe
Kiela, and Jason Weston. 2021. I like fish, espe-
cially dolphins: Addressing contradictions in dia-
logue modeling. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics and the 11th International Joint Conference
on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long
Papers) , pages 1699–1713, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
OpenAI. 2022. Chatgpt: Optimizing language models
for dialogue. OpenAI Blog.
OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.08774 .
José Otero and Walter Kintsch. 1992. Failures to detect
contradictions in a text: What readers believe versus
what they read. Psychological Science , 3(4):229–
236.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Nicholas Pangakis, Samuel Wolken, and Neil Fasching.
2023. Automated annotation with generative ai re-
quires validation. ArXiv , abs/2306.00176.
Graciela Rosemblat, Marcelo Fiszman, Dongwook Shin,
and Halil Kilicoglu. 2019. Towards a characteriza-
tion of apparent contradictions in the biomedical lit-
erature using context analysis. Journal of Biomedical
Informatics , 98:103275.
Farzaneh Sarafraz. 2012. Finding conflicting statements
in the biomedical literature . Ph.D. thesis, The Uni-
versity of Manchester (United Kingdom).
Tal Schuster, Sihao Chen, Senaka Buthpitiya, Alex
Fabrikant, and Donald Metzler. 2022a. Stretching
sentence-pair nli models to reason over long docu-
ments and clusters.
Tal Schuster, Sihao Chen, Senaka Buthpitiya, Alex
Fabrikant, and Donald Metzler. 2022b. Stretching
sentence-pair NLI models to reason over long doc-
uments and clusters. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 , pages
394–412, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Karan Singhal, Tao Tu, Juraj Gottweis, Rory Sayres,
Ellery Wulczyn, Le Hou, Kevin Clark, Stephen Pfohl,
Heather Cole-Lewis, Darlene Neal, Mike Schaeker-
mann, Amy Wang, Mohamed Amin, Sami Lachgar,
Philip Mansfield, Sushant Prakash, Bradley Green,
Ewa Dominowska, Blaise Aguera y Arcas, Nenad
Tomasev, Yun Liu, Renee Wong, Christopher Sem-
turs, S. Sara Mahdavi, Joelle Barral, Dale Webster,
Greg S. Corrado, Yossi Matias, Shekoofeh Azizi,
Alan Karthikesalingam, and Vivek Natarajan. 2023.
Towards expert-level medical question answering
with large language models.
Tianxiang Sun, Junliang He, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuan-
jing Huang. 2022. BERTScore is unfair: On social
bias in language model-based metrics for text gen-
eration. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 3726–3739, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Xiaofei Sun, Xiaoya Li, Jiwei Li, Fei Wu, Shangwei
Guo, Tianwei Zhang, and Guoyin Wang. 2023. Text
classification via large language models.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-
bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, et al. 2023. Llama 2: Open founda-
tion and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.09288 .
Longyue Wang, Chenyang Lyu, Tianbo Ji, Zhirui Zhang,
Dian Yu, Shuming Shi, and Zhaopeng Tu. 2023.
Document-level machine translation with large lan-
guage models.
Shuohang Wang, Yang Liu, Yichong Xu, Chenguang
Zhu, and Michael Zeng. 2021. Want to reduce label-
ing cost? gpt-3 can help. ArXiv , abs/2108.13487.Xiangcheng Wu, Xi Niu, and Ruhani Rahman. 2022.
Topological analysis of contradictions in text. In Pro-
ceedings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR Con-
ference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval , SIGIR ’22, page 2478–2483, New York,
NY , USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Wenpeng Yin, Dragomir Radev, and Caiming Xiong.
2021a. Docnli: A large-scale dataset for document-
level natural language inference.
Wenpeng Yin, Dragomir Radev, and Caiming Xiong.
2021b. DocNLI: A large-scale dataset for document-
level natural language inference. In Findings of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL-
IJCNLP 2021 , pages 4913–4922, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Tianyi Zhang, Faisal Ladhak, Esin Durmus, Percy Liang,
Kathleen McKeown, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto.
2023. Benchmarking large language models for news
summarization.
Chujie Zheng, Jinfeng Zhou, Yinhe Zheng, Libiao Peng,
Zhen Guo, Wenquan Wu, Zheng-Yu Niu, Hua Wu,
and Minlie Huang. 2022. CDConv: A benchmark
for contradiction detection in Chinese conversations.
InProceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 18–
29, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association
for Computational Linguistics.

--- PAGE 13 ---
A Dataset Details
We use three publically available datasets covering
different domains to build CONTRA DOC. More
specifically, we use the following datasets:
•News Articles : CNN-DailyMail dataset (Her-
mann et al., 2015), an open-source corpus
of 93k articles from CNN and 220k articles
from Daily Mail and collect 158 documents
for C ONTRA DOC-POS.
•Stories : NarrativeQA (Ko ˇcisk`y et al., 2018),
which is an open-source question-answering
dataset and consists of 1,572 stories and their
human-generated summaries. We collected
141 summaries for C ONTRA DOC-POS.
•Wikipedia : WikiText (Merity et al., 2016),
an open-source language modelling dataset
containing verified Wikipedia documents and
select 150 documents for CONTRA DOC-POS
.
We release our dataset under Apache 2.0 license5.
B Model details
We use the following state-of-the-art LLMs to test
both open-source and closed-source models in a
zero-shot setting on C ONTRA DOC.
•GPT3.5 : Also called ChatGPT6, this is an im-
proved version of GPT3 (Brown et al., 2020b)
optimized for chat. We use the gpt-3.5-turbo-
0613 model from the OpenAI API7.
•GPT4 (OpenAI, 2023): GPT4 is the latest
iteration of the GPT models and is also opti-
mized for chat. We use the gpt-4-0613 model
from the OpenAI API.
•PaLM2 (Anil et al., 2023): We use the PaLM
2 model ( text-bison ) from the Vertex AI plat-
form from Google Cloud8.
•LLaMAv2 (Touvron et al., 2023): We use
theLlama-2-Chat-70B model for our exper-
iments. We used the best performing model
that is fine-tuned on dialog data to follow 0-
shot instruction.
Unless otherwise specified, we use the default
configurations and decoding parameters for all our
experiments.
5https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
6https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt
7https://api.openai.com/
8https://cloud.google.com/vertex-ai/docs/
generative-ai/learn/modelsC Questions for Annotation
We highlight the original statement as well as the in-
troduced self-contradiction in the document as 1 for
annotators2 to verify the validity of document-level
self-contradiction. Annotators, guided by compre-
hensive guidelines, were tasked with the following
questions:
Q1. Do you think the two statements contradict
each other?
Q2. (If applicable): Is the position of the inserted
statement (red color) feasible?
Q3. Overall, do you think it makes an acceptable
contradictory document?
Q4. How close in the context of the modified sen-
tence can you find the evidence for the self-
contradiction? (As described in 3.1)
Q5. Select Type(s) of self-contradiction.
Each modified document was evaluated by two
annotators, establishing validity through consensus
on the self-contradiction and document validity.
For Q2, if an alternative insertion place is given by
the annotators, we add this modification as another
contradictory document in our setting.
Examples are filtered if both annotators an-
swered “Yes” for Q1, Q2, and Q3. For Q4, 88% of
the annotators agree with each other, and for 12%
that do not agree, we select the “closer one” as the
final tag. For Q5, we combine all types selected by
both annotators.
To verify the annotation quality, we run another
expert filter by the authors of this work to verify
controversial cases marked by annotators. Regard-
ing the self-contradiction injection method, the fi-
nalCONTRA DOCcontains 271 documents created
by contradictory statement replacing and 178 docu-
ments created by contradictory statement inserting.
D Prompts for experiment setting
For evaluating the different LLMs on CON-
TRADOC, we set up three experiments. Here, we
provide the corresponding prompts for each of the
experimental settings.
•Binary Judgment Prompt
[Insert Document here]
Determine whether the given document con-
tains any self-contradictions. Only answer
"yes" or "no"!

--- PAGE 14 ---
•Self-Contradiction in Top kPrompt:
Self-Contradictory Article: An article is
deemed self-contradictory when it contains
one(self-conflict mention) or more statements
that conflict with each other, making them mu-
tually exclusive. The following article con-
tains one self-contradiction. The task is to
find where it is. Provide evidence by quot-
ing mutually contradictory sentences from the
article. Article:
[Insert Document here]
Please respond by giving the five most likely
sentences that can reflect article-level contra-
diction(s), ranked by high to low possibility.
Don’t explain.
•Judgment then Find Prompt:
The task is to determine whether the article
contains any self-contradictions. If yes, pro-
vide evidence by quoting mutually contradic-
tory sentences in a list of strings in Python. If
no, give an empty list.
[Insert Document here]
Response: Form your answer in the following
format (OR options are provided):
Judgment: yes OR no
Evidence: ["sentence1", "sentence2", ..., "sen-
tenceN"] OR []
•Prompt for Effect of Prompts experiment:
Go over the following document and check if
there is any self-contradiction (e.g., conflict
facts) in it? If there are issues related to con-
sistency or coherence, please also point them
out.
Figure 4 compares the GPT-3.5 outputs on
this prompt (free-format evaluation) and the
judge-then-find evaluation.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Figure 4: Comparison between free-format evaluation and judge-then-find evaluation on GPT-3.5. The emotion of
the character contradicts the context, and is thus marked as “Emotion/Mood/Feeling” self-contradiction.
