# 2407.13089.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: ./document-conflict/2407.13089.pdf
# File size: 3428660 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
MetaSumPerceiver: Multimodal Multi-Document Evidence Summarization
for Fact-Checking
Ting-Chih Chen
Virginia Tech
tingchih@vt.eduChia-Wei Tang
Virginia Tech
cwtang@vt.eduChris Thomas
Virginia Tech
chris@cs.vt.edu
Abstract
Fact-checking real-world claims often requires
reviewing multiple multimodal documents to
assess a claim’s truthfulness, which is a highly
laborious and time-consuming task. In this
paper, we present a summarization model de-
signed to generate claim-specific summaries
useful for fact-checking from multimodal,
multi-document datasets. The model takes in-
puts in the form of documents, images, and
a claim, with the objective of assisting in
fact-checking tasks. We introduce a dynamic
perceiver-based model that can handle inputs
from multiple modalities of arbitrary lengths.
To train our model, we leverage a novel rein-
forcement learning-based entailment objective
to generate summaries that provide evidence
distinguishing between different truthfulness la-
bels. To assess the efficacy of our approach, we
conduct experiments on both an existing bench-
mark and a new dataset of multi-document
claims that we contribute. Our approach outper-
forms the SOTA approach by 4.6% in the claim
verification task on the MOCHEG dataset and
demonstrates strong performance on our new
Multi-News-Fact-Checking dataset. Code
1 Introduction
Fact-checking claims on social media platforms
poses a significant challenge due to the large vol-
ume of new claims constantly being posted without
sufficient methods for verification (Aïmeur et al.,
2023). Research indicates that manually verify-
ing all aspects of a 200-word claim can require
up to four hours of dedicated effort (Vladika and
Matthes, 2023). Further, despite the exceptional
capabilities of large language models (LLMs) in
natural language processing tasks, they still gener-
ate content with factual errors. Given that LLMs
can produce convincing statements and thus influ-
ence beliefs, the potential for hallucinations poses a
serious risk of misleading users when deployed for
fact-checking (Jakesch et al., 2023b,a; Kreps et al.,
Claim: Adhering to COVID -19 precautions, such as 
mask -wearing and encouraging breastfeeding , can be 
crucial for safeguarding young children, as studies 
suggest protective antibodies in breast milk may offer 
potential protection against COVID -19, despite the rarity 
of severe infections in newborns.
… . Existing evidence indicates that 
COVID -19 infections in newborns are 
uncommon, but they do happen. 
Transmission is primarily thought to 
occur when babies are exposed to family 
members or caregivers infected with 
COVID -19 themselves. New parents 
can take comfort in the fact that most 
babies with COVID -19 experience 
asymptomatic infections or mild 
disease. …… . Breast milk is encouraged whether 
through breastfeeding or pumping, and 
protective antibodies are in breastmilk. 
Studies are still underway to determine if 
the antibodies protect the baby from 
COVID -19. However, similar antibody 
levels from other vaccines, like whooping 
cough, administered during pregnancy 
have proven to be protective for babies.  
…
Generated summary for fact checking: For young, 
unvaccinated children, adherence to proven 
COVID -19 precautions, including mask -wearing 
in public , is essential to minimize infection risks 
and potential complications. Encouraging 
breastfeeding, with its protective antibodies, 
may offer defense against COVID -19, akin to 
the proven efficacy of antibodies from other 
vaccines administered during pregnancy. …MetaSumPerceiver
Entailment
Neutral
Contradiction
Claim… . For children too young to be 
vaccinated it is important to follow 
proven COVID -19 precautions such 
as mask wearing when in public, 
indoor places to reduce the chance of 
becoming infected with the 
coronavirus. Parents and caregivers 
should understand that children 
infected with the coronavirus can 
develop complications requiring 
hospitalization. …
Figure 1: Overview of MetaSumPerceiver (MSP): Using
inputs such as documents, images, and claims, MSP gen-
erates summaries to facilitate fact-checking. In this ex-
ample, the summary provides evidence and establishes
that the claim in question is entailed by the evidence.
2022). This concern highlights the possibility of
language models becoming new sources of misin-
formation and disinformation. The proliferation of
misinformation and fake news adds to this predica-
ment, making it increasingly difficult to distinguish
between reliable and deceptive content (Goldstein
et al., 2023; Spitale et al., 2023). Thus, there is
an urgent need for tools capable of succinctly sum-
marizing relevant evidence for fact-checkers, i.e.,
systems that provide a brief yet comprehensive
overview of the relevant evidence to facilitate ac-
curate and reliable assessments. Existing research
relying on summarization for fact-checking is in-
effective because these methods fail to extract evi-
dence from the resources (Das et al., 2023; Ceron
and Carrara, 2023; Berlinski et al., 2023).
A potential solution to this problem is provided
by multimodal summarization (Khullar and Arora,
2020; Liu et al., 2022), which can generate sum-
maries from sources including text, images, videos,
and audio. This is a challenging task because each
modality might contribute complementary informa-arXiv:2407.13089v2  [cs.AI]  20 Sep 2024

--- PAGE 2 ---
Table 1: Comparing Multi-News-Fact-Checking with other fact-checking datasets. Topic(s) is the inferred value.
Datasets #Samples Source Topic(s) Language Multi-modal Multi-doc Verification Explanations Text/image retrieval
Zlatkova et al. (2019) 1,233 Snopes, Reuters < 1,500 English ✔ ✗ ✔ ✗ ✗
Cheema et al. (2022) 3,400 X < 3,400 English ✔ ✔ ✔ ✗ ✔
Nielsen and McConville (2022) 12,914 X 26,048 Multi ✔ ✔ ✔ ✗ ✗
Yao et al. (2023) 15,601 Politifact, Snopes < 15,631 English ✔ ✗ ✔ ✔ ✔
Nakov et al. (2021) 18,014 X < 1,312 Multi ✗ ✔ ✔ ✗ ✗
Ours 111,905 Multi-News < 1,500 English ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔ ✔
tion, e.g., a bar chart image accompanying relevant
facts mentioned in the text. Present methods usu-
ally produce summaries given a limited number of
inputs (Puduppully and Lapata, 2021; Wang et al.,
2022a). The research challenge lies in process-
ing arbitrary inputs from diverse modalities and
discerning the explicit relationships between them.
However, unlike the standard summarization task,
which seeks to summarize the salient content of an
article, our objective is to effectively distill claim-
specific evidence useful for fact-checking across
various modalities.
To train our system to generate summaries useful
for human fact-checking, we assess the utility of
our summaries at performing entailment (Dagan
et al., 2006), a closely aligned task to fact-checking.
Our work is orthogonal to prior work in entailment,
in that rather than learning to predict the entailment
label for the premise-hypothesis pair, we seek to
generate the premise for a specific claim from a
pool of multimodal data. To address the limitations
of applying existing summarization methods for
fact-checking, we propose the MetaSumPerceiver
(MSP) model in Figure 1, where the input consists
of a claim, a set of documents and images, and the
objective is to generate a summary that expedites
the fact-checking process for humans. We initially
train the perceiver model with a summarization
model. Subsequently, to produce the summary for
fact-checking, we employ a proxy reward mecha-
nism to update the summarizer to ensure the gen-
eration of an accurate and relevant summary with
necessary evidence.
To support research on the task of multi-
document fact-checking, we contribute a bench-
mark (Multi-News-Fact-Checking) of claims and
entailment labels whose evidence is drawn from
multiple documents. We evaluate our method on
the MOCHEG benchmark (Yao et al., 2023) and
our new dataset and demonstrate substantial im-
provements compared to existing baselines. The
major contributions of this paper are as follows:
•We present an innovative approach for multi-
modal multi-document summarization specifi-cally designed for fact-checking applications.
•We release the Multi-News-Fact-Checking
dataset, to support the multimodal multi-
document fact-checking summarization task.
•We perform detailed experiments and abla-
tions of our model and loss functions which
clearly demonstrate the superiority of our ap-
proach over existing methods.
2 Related Work
2.1 Perceiver
The Perceiver architecture (Jaegle et al., 2021) en-
ables scaling transformers to input sequences of
arbitrary lengths, by reducing the memory foot-
print in standard self-attention. Follow-up works,
such as Perceiver IO (Jaegle et al., 2022), adapt the
original model by presenting a versatile architec-
ture adept at processing data from various settings
while ensuring linear scalability with input and
output dimensions. The model has demonstrated
strong performance on many downstream tasks, in-
cluding optical flow estimation (Butler et al., 2012)
and the GLUE language benchmark (Wang et al.,
2018). Our method relies on Jaegle et al. (2022) to
process a variable number of arbitrarily long text
documents and images. We use the model in se-
quence with a summarization model to generate a
multimodal summary.
2.2 Multimodal Fact-checking Datasets
In the current task of fact-checking using multiple
datasets (Zlatkova et al., 2019; Nakov et al., 2021;
Cheema et al., 2022; Nielsen and McConville,
2022; Yao et al., 2023), the main sources of data
are X and Snopes, with a focus on COVID-19, elec-
tions, and the Russo-Ukrainian war. This has led
to a couple of issues. First, X has already blocked
their API, making it difficult for people to access
these datasets. Second, we are seeking a dataset
that covers a variety of topics rather than being
limited to specific ones. Additionally, we prefer a
dataset in the English language. To address these
issues, we propose a new multimodal fact-checking

--- PAGE 3 ---
dataset based on Multi-News (Fabbri et al., 2019),
which includes information from multiple docu-
ments and related images, covering a broader ar-
ray of topics such as news, policy, weather, sports,
etc. Table 1 provides a comparison of the Multi-
News-Fact-Checking dataset with the aforemen-
tioned datasets.
2.3 Learning From Feedback
Recent advancements in LLMs have revolution-
ized the AI landscape (Touvron et al., 2023a,b;
Driess et al., 2023; OpenAI, 2023). However, be-
cause they are mostly trained on data scraped from
the web LLMs sometimes produce undesired out-
comes, including generating biased or harmful con-
tent (Bender et al., 2021). Recognizing the im-
portance of aligning LLMs with human values,
has led to efforts in supervised fine-tuning (SFT)
with ethical guidelines (Taori et al., 2023). While
these efforts demonstrate the potential of integrat-
ing human feedback into training using reinforce-
ment learning for user-tailored tasks (Ouyang et al.,
2022; Bai et al., 2022), training LLMs to reflect
human values is quite challenging. In our work,
we adopt the idea of training language models with
feedback. However, rather than relying on a human
fact-checker, we utilize a surrogate reward model
(an entailment model) to stand in the place of a
human fact checker, in order to fine-tune the sum-
marizer to generate summaries that give evidence
for fact-checking specific claims through Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017;
Zheng et al., 2023).
Table 2: Analysis of claims in the Multi-News-Fact-
Checking dataset. Top: Entailment accuracy using
Llama 2. Bottom: Classification results indicating claim
checkworthiness.
Entailment label consistency Accuracy (%)
Entailment claims 78.3
Nentral claims 64.2
Contradiction claims 74.1
Checkworthiness results Percentage (%)
Unimportant factual sentence (UFS) 17.67
Checkworthy factual sentence (CFS) 68.6
Non-factual sentence (NFS) 13.71
3 Multi-News-Fact-Checking Dataset
To train our system, we need a dataset of claims
whose facts are drawn from multiple documents
along with the entailment label of each claim. We
build our dataset on top of the Multi-News sum-
marization dataset (Fabbri et al., 2019), which con-tains sets of multiple text documents along with
human-written summaries of each set. Because
the Multi-News dataset lacks claims specifically
tailored for fact-checking tasks, we prompt Llama
2 (Touvron et al., 2023b) to generate labeled claims
from each set of documents. Within each group of
Multi-News documents, we leverage the human-
written multi-document summary to generate 30
claims (ten of each entailment type), resulting in a
dataset of 1,291,168 labeled claims. The specific
prompts contain sections containing a task descrip-
tion, example, and instructions, which are fully
detailed in the appendix 9.1. Our dataset contains
111,905 images we obtained by retrieving images
from the original articles.
To assess the quality and effectiveness of claim
generation, we conducted an evaluation using a
scale from 1 to 5, where 1 indicates low quality and
5 indicates high quality. We tested 60 claims and
obtained an average score of 3.61 for claim gen-
eration quality and effectiveness. In comparison,
the claims generated from PRIMERA summaries
scored an average of 3.21. To ensure impartial-
ity, the annotators were blinded and asked to rate
the claims alongside their respective articles and
summaries.
Additionally, in Table 2, we validated claim la-
bels (entailment, neutral, and contradiction) using
Llama 2. Specifically, we treated the ground truth
label (i.e., the label used to prompt Llama 2 to gen-
erate a claim) as the ground truth and prompted
Llama 2 in a zero-shot manner to predict the en-
tailment labels. The average accuracy for claim
verification was 72.2%, indicating that the gener-
ated claims were largely consistently predicted as
their intended labels.
To assess the checkworthiness of our generated
claims (i.e., to ensure that they are factual claims
worth fact-checking), we use a pre-trained model
trained on the ClaimBuster dataset (Arslan et al.,
2020), as illustrated in Table 2. The model assigns
claims into three classes: UFS (unimportant factual
claims that are not considered check-worthy), CFS
(claims containing factual information of public
interest in terms of their veracity), and NFS (sen-
tences that do not contain any factual claims). The
result shows that 70% of the prompted claims are
check-worthy claims. This outcome substantiates
that our prompts are well-designed for this task,
and that Llama 2 accurately comprehend the task’s
intended meaning without misunderstanding.

--- PAGE 4 ---
:Cross attention:Projection
MetaSumPerceiverSummary for
fact-checking 
:PremisePredicted claim label 
Entailment modelT ext
Ground-truth claim label PPO
CLIPBAR T Claim
Images
BAR T DocsClaim
Figure 2: Overview of MetaSumPerceiver (MSP): This figure illustrates the process of generating a summary for
fact-checking using MSP, integrating a fixed entailment model for accurate truthfulness labeling. Furthermore, it
highlights how PPO is employed to continually refine the summary during the fact-checking process.
4 Approach
In this section, we explain the details of our ap-
proach, MSP as illustrated in Figure 2. We also
describe the preprocessing steps for both text and
image data, the components of our model, and the
reinforcement learning methodology we applied to
train MSP. Our approach is capable of summariz-
ing multiple multimodal documents consisting of
arbitrarily long texts and images. Specifically, we
usexC,xD, and xIto represent embeddings for
claims, documents, and images, respectively.
4.1 Preprocessing
Due to the sequence length limitation, we utilize a
combination of Perceiver with BART (Lewis et al.,
2020) and CLIP (Wang et al., 2022b) to extract em-
beddings. To circumvent exceeding the sequence
length, we break down the data into chunks of
1024 tokens. Subsequently, we employ Perceiver
to merge these chunks for both textual and visual
embeddings. For the textual data, we use BART
to obtain text embeddings following (Devlin et al.,
2019). As a result, each input text is transformed
into a set of token embeddings xC∈Rn×Dand
xD∈Rm×D, where nandmare the number of to-
kens and Dis the dimension of embedding. Then,
we use CLIP (ViT-G-14) to extract visual features
for the images. Finally, each input image under-
goes a transformation, resulting in a set of visual
embeddings. xI∈Rk×D, where kis the number
of tokens and Dis the dimension of the embedding.
4.2 Model Training Strategy
Our goal is to generate a textual summary of a set of
multimodal documents that enables a fact-checker
to determine the veracity of a claim. In order toselect relevant visual content from the images, we
begin by performing a cross-attention between the
images and the claim:
XIC=ATTN (QxC, KxI, VxI), (1)
where the query QxCis the claim’s sequence of
embeddings and KxIandVxIare the embedding
sequences of visual tokens from the images. We
project XICinto the document embedding XD,
which serves as the input for MSP. The output
from the cross-attention block, XIC, is initially pro-
jected by a linear projection layer with the weight
θ. It is then concatenated with xD, as depicted in
the subsequent equation:
XICD=
proj(XIC, θ)⊺, X⊺
D⊺, (2)
where XICD will be the input to MSP. Prior to
training our full model, we pre-train our attention
block and summarization model using the Multi-
News dataset’s human written summaries using the
cross-entropy loss function:
Lsum=−PT
t=1PN
i=1ytilog(ˆyti), (3)
where Trepresents the sequence length, Nis the
vocabulary size, and ytiandˆytidenote the ground
truth and predicted probabilities of token iat time
stept, respectively. In the remaining text, we omit
the summation over the vocabulary for conciseness.
4.3 Fine-tuning The Summarizer
To enhance the summarizer’s ability to produce
summaries that provide the evidence needed for

--- PAGE 5 ---
Query
Active model
Reference modelMSPReward model
Entailment criticLM critic
Log-probsKL-divReward -PPO
Log-probsFigure 3: The Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) process starts with the summarizer generating a response based
on the input query. The reward model then assesses this query-response pair, producing a single reward score.
Simultaneously, the process calculates the KL-divergence by comparing the likelihood of token sequences in the
response with both the currently fine-tuned active model and a pre-trained reference model. The KL-divergence
acts as a measure of reward, ensuring that responses from the active model align with those from the reference
model. Additionally, we input the summary into Mistral LM to evaluate whether the summary is concise or not. In
conclusion, PPO updates the parameters of the active model based on the reward model’s output, Mistral LM, and
the value of the KL-divergence.
fact-checking claims, we adopt the concept of train-
ing a language model using feedback with rein-
forcement learning. After pretraining the perceiver
and summarization models, we employ reinforce-
ment learning with an entailment model serving as
a surrogate for a human fact-checker as feedback.
We first exclusively apply reinforcement learning
to the perceiver. Subsequently, we unfreeze the
summarizer and continue training end-to-end with
both the perceiver and summarizer. We illustrate
our fine-tuning process in Figure 3.
4.3.1 Reward Model For Fact-Checking
Contrary to the approach in reinforcement learn-
ing from human feedback, which necessitates a
human arbitrator to score the model’s outputs,
in this study, we train a reward model to act
like a human fact-checker to guide the summa-
rizer in producing summaries for fact-checking
instead. We utilized a comprehensive dataset con-
sisted with MultiNLI (Williams et al., 2018), Fever-
NLI (Thorne et al., 2018), and Adversarial-NLI
(ANLI) (Nie et al., 2020), encompassing a total
of 763,193 premise-claim pairs. Leveraging this
dataset, we fine-tuned DeBERTA V3 (He et al.,
2023) for the task of entailment classification using
cross-entropy loss. Serving as an entailment classi-
fier, this model achieves accuracy rates of 90.3%,
77.7%, and 57.9% in the MultiNLI, Fever-NLI, and
ANLI evaluation datasets, respectively.4.3.2 Proximal Policy Optimization
We define the score from the reward model as the
probability of the ground-truth label given both
the claim (as the hypothesis) and the generated
summary for fact-checking (as the premise). The
formulation for the score from the reward model
can be formulated as:
r(xC,ˆyt) =P(ygt|xC,ˆyt)−
0.5∗Σygt̸=ypredP(ypred|xC,ˆyt),(4)
where xC,ˆyt,ygtandypred denote the claim,
the generated summary, the groud-truth label of the
claim, and the predicted label of the claim, respec-
tively. The value of P(y{gt,pred }|xC,ˆyt)is derived
from the trained entailment classifier. The primary
objective behind this reward function is to maxi-
mize the likelihood that the generated summary for
fact-checking contains the facts necessary for the
model to predict the claim’s ground truth label.
In this paper, we employ PPO as our policy gra-
dient method for reinforcement learning. PPO adds
an additional term to the reward function, which im-
poses a penalty determined by the Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence between the trained RL policy
summarizer, πPPO
ϕ, and the initial supervised sum-
marizer πSFT.
Moreover, we incorporate an extra reward
rquality , LM critic, to evaluate the quality of the

--- PAGE 6 ---
Table 3: Performance of claim verification in MOCHEG with our method. We separately calculate the precision
and recall in supported, refuted, and NEI claim labels. We compare our method with published baselines in
Table 4. The labels "Supported," "NEI," and "Refuted" in fact-checking classification are analogous to truthfulness
labels. "Supported" aligns with the entailment label, indicating that the hypothesis is similar to the premise. "NEI"
corresponds to "not enough information" and is comparable to the neutral label, indicating that the hypothesis
includes both information entailed by the premise and information that lacks clarity or confirmation. "Refuted"
shares the same classification as contradiction, indicating that the hypothesis is not entailed with the premise.
Setting Accuracy (%)Precision (%)
SupportedPrecision (%)
RefutedPrecision (%)
NEIRecall (%)
SupportedRecall (%)
RefutedRecall (%)
NEI
MSP (Entail. critic) w/ Text Evidence →DeBERTA V3 43.7 79.2 66.9 33.9 40.5 30.6 25.8
MSP (Entail. critic) w/ Text + Img Evidence →DeBERTA V3 50.8 83.4 69.3 27.3 42.9 34.2 30.9
MSP (Entail. critic) w/ Text Evidence →Llama 2 46.7 80.4 68.1 31.5 37.2 35.4 31.5
MSP (Entail. critic) w/ Text + Img Evidence →Llama 2 53.7 87.3 60.3 32.4 48.3 36.9 34.8
MSP (Entail., LM critics) w/ Text Evidence →DeBERTA V3 40.2 77.3 63.4 45.9 38.2 35.7 28.4
MSP (Entail., LM critics) w/ Text + Img Evidence →DeBERTA V3 47.8 78.1 67.5 38.1 39.5 37.5 34.1
MSP (Entail., LM critics) w/ Text Evidence →Llama 2 49.3 81.5 65.2 37.4 39.7 31.5 35.7
MSP (Entail., LM critics) w/ Text + Img Evidence →Llama 2 55.6 88.2 57.5 39.6 51.2 32.4 37.2
summary, specifically focusing on clarity and con-
ciseness. We utilize Mistral (Jiang et al., 2023)
along with a detailed quality testing prompt pro-
vided in the appendix to assess this aspect. The
assigned reward ranges from 0 to 1. We integrate
rquality into our model update in conjunction with
the existing rtotal. The cumulative reward is de-
scribed as follows:
rtotal= (rquality +r(xC,ˆyt)−
ηKL(πPPO
ϕ(ˆyt|xD), πSFT(ˆyt|xD)))/2,(5)
where ηrepresents the KL reward coefficient,
which determines the magnitude of the KL penalty,
we set it to 0.2 for our model. This coefficient func-
tions as an entropy boost, enhancing exploration
throughout the policy domain and urging the model
to engage in a diverse set of actions rather than the
one currently considered the best. In addition, it
inhibits the policy from rapidly committing to a
singular strategy, and this encourages outputs from
the RL fine-tuned model to not deviate too far from
the original model.
MSP is optimized through PPO based on the
policy gradient methods that optimize the policy of
the model using gradient ascent. The update rule
for the policy gradient is given as:
θ←−θ+α∇θJ(θ), (6)
where αandJθdenote the learning rate and the
expected return under policy πθfrom the model,
respectively.5 Experiments
5.1 Claim Verification
The goal of our method is to generate a summary
from multiple documents and modalities that is
useful for fact-checking a claim. In order to assess
how useful our method is at this task, we com-
pare the performance of our method on MOCHEG,
which presents a benchmark and method for multi-
document multimodal fact-checking. Specifically,
we employed two fixed entailment models, namely
DeBERTA V3 (He et al., 2023) and Llama 2 (Tou-
vron et al., 2023b), as our surrogate “human” fact
checkers to predict the entailment label of a claim
given our generated summary. Importantly, we do
not fine-tune these models with our generated sum-
maries to avoid biasing the models toward the lin-
guistic or stylistic patterns of the summaries. This
ensures that they do not learn spurious features in
the downstream task.
As depicted in Tables 3 and 4, our method ex-
hibits superior performance, achieving a SOTA
48.6 F-score in the MOCHEG dataset. Further-
more, according to Table 3, our method demon-
strates strong precision performance for the ”Sup-
ported” label. We conduct separate tests with two
distinct critics. It is noted that the most optimal per-
formance was achieved when deploying both the
entailment critic and the LM critic. This outcome
indicates that our model is proficient in verifying
claim labels through clear and concise summaries.
Table 3 reveals that the best results are achieved
when inputs incorporate both textual and image
evidence. Perhaps unsurprisingly given its size, the
zero-shot Llama 2 entailment surrogate model sur-
passes DeBERTA V3 in performance. Nevertheless,
a notable issue persists, where the surrogate entail-

--- PAGE 7 ---
ment models struggle to accurately deal with NEI
claim labels.
Table 4 highlights the superiority of our model
compared to MOCHEG. In the case of MOCHEG,
truthfulness labels are predicted by averaging a
stance representation derived from both textual and
image evidence. Furthermore, MOCHEG’s classi-
fier relies on fixed thresholds, which may not be op-
timal for every situation. In contrast, our approach
involves generating summaries for fact-checking
via reinforcement learning with fixed entailment
models and LM critic. Although a difference re-
mains in the result of human vs system prediction
performance, our model surpasses the prior state-
of-the-art system by 4.6% F-score.
Table 4: Performance of claim verification in MOCHEG.
DeBERTaV3 and Llama 2 represent the fixed entailment
models. "Gold Evidence" denotes ground truth text and
image evidence, while "System Evidence" refers to au-
tomatically retrieved text and image evidence. "Human"
indicates human evaluation.
Setting F-score (%)
MSP(Entail. critic) w/ Text Evidence →DeBERTA V3 42.7
MSP(Entail. critic) w/ Text + Img Evidence →DeBERTA V3 45.1
MSP(Entail. critic) w/ Text Evidence →Llama 2 43.9
MSP(Entail. critic) w/ Text + Img Evidence →Llama 2 48.2
MSP(Entail., LM critics) w/ Text Evidence →DeBERTA V3 44.1
MSP(Entail., LM critics) w/ Text + Img Evidence →DeBERTA V3 46.1
MSP(Entail., LM critics) w/ Text Evidence →Llama 2 44.6
MSP(Entail., LM critics) w/ Text + Img Evidence →Llama 2 48.6
MOCHEG w/ Text Evidence 42.7
MOCHEG w/ Image Evidence 40.9
MOCHEG w/ Text and Image Evidence 44.0
Human w/o Evidence 20.0
Human w/ System Evidence 62.0
Human w/ Gold Evidence 70.0
5.2 Ablations
Additionally, we conducted ablation experiments
for claim verification on our Multi-News-Fact-
Checking dataset. A comparative analysis of our
method with Llama 2 and other offline summariza-
tion models, PRIMERA (Xiao et al., 2022), PEGA-
SUS (Zhang et al., 2020) and T5 large (Raffel et al.,
2020), is presented in Tables 5 and 6.
Similar to our results in MOCHEG, Tables 5
and 6 show that our approach, when employing
the Llama 2 surrogate entailment model, achieves
the best performance. Furthermore, we achieve bal-
anced accuracy in both precision and recall, under-
scoring our method’s ability to clearly differentiate
between truthful and untruthful labels without bias
in predictions. The results highlight the inability
of other summarization models to generate sum-
maries useful for fact-checking, which causes the
surrogate model difficulty in accurately assessing
the truthfulness labels. Furthermore, it is evidentthat the LM critic significantly aids the entailment
model in verifying claim labels effectively. The
LM critic ensures that the summary is more con-
cise and clear while retaining the essential meaning
in the summary.
In addition, to assess the degree to which our
summaries are merely extractive of the source ar-
ticles, we employed ROUGE to evaluate our sum-
maries alongside the provided articles. Our sum-
maries received a ROUGE score of 0.53, whereas
the human-written summaries in the Multi-news
dataset scored 0.62. Upon comparison, we believe
our summaries do not simply rephrase the source
articles.
Moreover, to determine the fidelity and informa-
tiveness of the generated summaries, we conducted
a human evaluation using a scale from 1 to 5, with
1 indicating low fidelity/informativeness and 5 in-
dicating high fidelity/informativeness. We tested
60 generated summaries and obtained an average
score of 3.77 for fidelity and informativeness. Com-
paratively, the PRIMERA summaries scored 3.35.
To ensure impartiality, we blinded the annotators
and asked them to rate the generated summaries
alongside their respective articles.
Table 5: Performance of claim verification in Multi-
News-Fact-Checking dataset. DeBERTA V3 and Llama
2 serve as the fixed entailment models. "Gold Evidence"
denotes ground truth text and image evidence, while
"System Evidence" refers to automatically retrieved text
and image evidence. "Human" indicates human evalua-
tion.
Setting F-score (%)
PEGASUS →DeBERTA V3 25.4
PEGASUS →Llama 2 30.8
T5 large→DeBERTA V3 28.5
T5 large→Llama 2 32.7
PRIMERA →DeBERTA V3 38.2
PRIMERA →Llama 2 38.3
MSP(Entail., LM critics) →DeBERTA V3 40.1
MSP(Entail. critic) →Llama 2 41.8
MSP(Entail., LM critics) →Llama 2 43.7
Human w/o Evidence 23.0
Human w/ System Evidence 65.0
Human w/ Gold Evidence 76.0
We also removed the image component from our
model and tested it on the FEVER testing dataset.
Using Llama2, our zero-shot entailment prediction
accuracy was 62%. Using PRIMERA’s summaries,
the most competitive baseline for multidocument
summarization, we obtained 42% on FEVER. Thus,
we continue to outperform on this benchmark. No-
tably, we did not fine-tune the downstream clas-

--- PAGE 8 ---
Table 6: Performance of claim verification in Multi-News-Fact-Checking dataset. We compare our method with
Llama 2, and other offline summarization models.
Setting Accuracy (%)Precision (%)
EntailmentPrecision (%)
ContradictionPrecision (%)
NeutralRecall (%)
EntailmentRecall (%)
ContradictionRecall (%)
Neutral
PEGASUS →DeBERTA V3 33.2 64.2 14.7 21.5 37.3 12.4 11.9
PEGASUS →Llama 2 39.5 37.4 23.1 42.8 27.6 24.3 24.0
T5 large →DeBERTA V3 34.8 62.8 17.5 26.2 33.0 18.5 18.2
T5 large →Llama 2 37.2 40.2 32.8 48.0 30.5 26.4 26.8
PRIMERA →DeBERTA V3 35.9 68.2 32.7 23.7 35.8 23.8 45.1
PRIMERA →Llama 2 39.2 43.5 47.2 33.1 47.2 35.5 24.9
MSP(Entail., LM critics) →DeBERTA V3 36.9 74.3 29.3 28.3 42.5 23.9 44.8
MSP(Entail. critic) →Llama 2 42.6 41.0 53.7 34.6 54.8 37.8 29.6
MSP(Entail., LM critics) →Llama 2 46.0 49.5 49.3 34.1 56.4 44.7 28.9
Table 7: Performace of explanation generation. Our system outperforms MOCHEG on equivalent settings. Gold
Truthfulness denotes ground truth claim label and System Truthfulness means the predicted claim label.
Setting ROUGE 1 (%) ROUGE 2 (%) ROUGE L (%) BLEU (%) BERTScore (%)
MOCHEG w/ Gold Evidence, Gold Truthfulness 45.5 27.3 35.4 21.8 89.0
MOCHEG w/ Gold Evidence, System Truthfulness 43.8 26.3 34.1 20.8 88.8
MOCHEG w/ System Evidence, Gold Truthfulness 35.5 17.4 26.0 10.9 87.0
MOCHEG w/ System Evidence, System Truthfulness 33.8 16.5 24.8 10.0 86.9
MSP(Entail., LM critics) w/ System Evidence, Gold Truthfulness 37.8 19.4 24.6 11.4 88.1
MSP(Entail., LM critics) w/ System Evidence, System Truthfulness 35.1 16.3 24.9 10.6 87.5
Normal summary
President Trump has been criticized for congratulating
Vladimir Putin on his election victory , and it has now been
revealed that Trump invited Putin to the White House
during a phone call. While the details are unclear , the
invitation adds controversy due to allegations of Russian
meddling in the election and the poisoning of a former spy
in Britain.  White House press chief  Sarah Huckabee
Sanders confirmed the discussion of the White House as a
potential meeting place.
Concise and clear summary
President Trump, criticized for congratulating Putin on
his election, invited him to the White House during a
phone call. The invitation, amidst allegations of Russian
interference and a spy poisoning , adds controversy .
Sanders confirmed the White House as a potential
meeting place, but no plans have been set.
Figure 4: The normal summary is produced by our
initial MSP model, while the concise and clear summary
is generated using MSP trained with the rquality reward.
sifier on any benchmark, unlike FEVER’s evalu-
ation methods that directly train on labeled data
in FEVER. Fine-tuning the final classifier would
likely yield better results, but this is orthogonal
to our contribution. Our zero-shot evaluation on
FEVER, compared to the most competitive multi-
document summarization baseline, demonstrates
that our approach significantly outperformed (62%
vs. 42%), underscoring the importance of fact-
checking-driven summarization.
5.3 Explanation Generation
In order to assess the degree to which our gener-
ated summaries contain the relevant facts necessary
to fact check the generated claims, we measurethe ability of a method to generate an explanation
of the predicted truthfulness label using our sum-
mary. We adopt a methodology similar to Yao et al.
(2023), where we consider the input claim C, its
truthfulness label YC, and the summary for fact-
checking {T1, T2, ...}generated from MSP. These
components are concatenated into an overall se-
quence Xusing a separator </s>. During the train-
ing of the rationale generator, we employ the actual
truthfulness label of each claim as input. Critically,
we do not retrain or fine-tune MSP for this task.
In the evaluation phase, we utilize the truthfulness
label predicted by the fixed entailment models.
Following Yao et al. (2023), we utilize BART
to generate the ruling statement. Our evaluation
metrics include ROUGE (Lin, 2004), BLEU (Pap-
ineni et al., 2002), and BERTScore (Zhang* et al.,
2020). To assess the performance of explanation
generation, we compare it with MOCHEG (Yao
et al., 2023), as shown in Table 7, Figure 4 and 5.
We observe that our model outperforms
MOCHEG’s evidence-retrieval based method (“sys-
tem evidence”) on the rationale generation task.
In our case, “system evidence” is our generated
summary. We note that MOCHEG’s method re-
lies on retrieval from a pool of multimodal doc-
uments. The ground truth explanations rely on
these sentences and thus may share some phras-
ing. This gives a slight advantage to MOCHEG’s
method on some metrics that measure n-gram over-
lap, whereas our method based on summarization
may rephrase the same evidence. Nevertheless, we
observe that our system outperforms MOCHEG’s

--- PAGE 9 ---
Claim Summary for fact-checking Image evidence Truthfulness
The driver in a video appeared
to ram a crowd of people,
some of whom were identified
as Taco Bell employees.
Supported... The incident, captured on video, shows the
driver assaulting an employee before plowing
into people outside the restaurant, then
crashing through the front.  Two individuals
were treated on-site, and one was taken to the
hospital. The Charles County Sherif f's Of fice is
investigating, of fering a cash reward for
information. Charges are pending as they work to
identify and locate the driver and occupants.
NEICriticism over the failure to
conduct immediate, widespread
coronavirus testing in the U.S.
focused on the availability of test
kits from the WHO.... The U.S. faced delays in developing and
deploying tests, with defective CDC tests and
regulatory issues. Accusations surfaced that
the U.S. rejected WHO's test, but WHO
clarified they never discussed providing tests
to the U.S.  The CDC's standard protocol involves
developing its own tests, and Dr . Anthony Fauci
mentioned it would have been nice to have WHO
tests as a backup but emphasized the CDC's
focus on reliable testing.
A video documents a hot-mic
exchange between Fox News
reporter John Roberts and a 'fake
news tech' in which they admit
COVID-19 was a hoax, and that
everyone in the news media has
already been vaccinated.Refuted
... It does not reveal a bombshell revelation but
rather an informal exchange between friends.
Mills jokes about the virus being a hoax, and
Roberts clarifies that he doesn't think it was a
hoax.  The video, not deceptively edited, captures
sardonic gallows humor and was shared on social
media with misleading claims about the pandemic
being a hoax. The conversation mainly revolves
around a recent USC study on infection rates in
California.Figure 5: Explanation generation examples of Multimodal Fact-Checking. The Truthfulness column shows gold
labels.
generated explanations.
We further observe that our explanations gen-
erated using system evidence and system truthful-
ness outperform MOCHEG’s method, which re-
lies on the ground truth truthfulness label on the
BERTScore metric. Overall, these results demon-
strate that our summarizer, which was not trained
for the rationale prediction task, is capturing rele-
vant evidence across modalities in a short summary
better than MOCHEG’s evidence retrieval-based
approach.
6 Conclusion
We present MetaSumPerceiver (MSP), a summa-
rization model crafted to generate concise and in-
formative summaries specifically tailored for fact-
checking claims in intricate multimodal datasets.
The model’s adaptable architecture can handle vary-
ing numbers of documents and input types, en-
compassing documents, images, and claims, by
leveraging a perceiver-based design. We train our
model using a RL approach, aiming to produce
summaries that are instrumental in verifying the
accuracy of claims. Moreover, our reward func-
tion is designed to generate more concise and clear
summaries, aiding in the verification of diverse
claims with the assistance of the LM critic. Ourexperimental assessments on the MOCHEG and
our Multi-News-Fact-Checking datasets highlight
MSP’s robust performance in claim verification and
explanation generation tasks and demonstrate its
effectiveness in real-world fact-checking scenarios.
This contribution underscores MSP’s potential to
streamline fact-checking processes in today’s mul-
timodal information landscape. Finally, we release
the publicly accessible Multi-News-Fact-Checking
dataset, aimed at assisting researchers in develop-
ing multi-document fact-checking methods.
7 Acknowledgements
We acknowledge Advanced Research Computing
at Virginia Tech for providing computational re-
sources and technical support that have contributed
to the results reported within this paper. We
also thank all reviewers for their comments which
helped improve the paper.

--- PAGE 10 ---
8 Limitations
Given the societal importance of fact-checking ap-
plications, it is important that the limitations of
our method be explored. Our experimental results
reveal that the surrogate entailment model often as-
signs truthfulness labels for entailment even when
it struggles to fully grasp the relationship between
the claim and the summary with evidence. This
issue not only impacts the judgment of the claim
label but also affects MSP during training. One po-
tential solution is using a textual entailment model
adept at managing this uncertainty or excluding
such instances during training. Secondly, Llama 2’s
claims in the Multi-News-Fact-Checking dataset
have certain flaws. Our review suggests that neu-
tral claims might mix consistent and conflicting
details. Enhancing our data creation prompts or the
prompts used in the second-stage claiming could
boost Llama 2’s understanding.
Our model, trained on English text and topics
from the Multi-News benchmarks, may not per-
form well in other languages without retraining.
Care should be taken to ensure the model is trained
on data that closely aligns with the target domain
of interest, if possible, to minimize errors. Finally,
our model relies on identifying relevant and trusted
source documents on which to perform summa-
rization and checking. While this document-level
retrieval task is orthogonal to our research, failure
to retrieve relevant documents will affect the down-
stream performance of the fact-checking system.
If irrelevant documents are used, even true claims
might be wrongly challenged. Thus, approaches
should confirm that events and entities in sourced
documents are directly related, employing sophisti-
cated methods.
References
Esma Aïmeur, Sabrine Amri, and Gilles Brassard. 2023.
Fake news, disinformation and misinformation in so-
cial media: a review. Soc. Netw. Anal. Min. , 13(1):30.
Fatma Arslan, Naeemul Hassan, Chengkai Li, and Mark
Tremayne. 2020. A benchmark dataset of check-
worthy factual claims. Proceedings of the Interna-
tional AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media ,
14(1):821–829.
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda
Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan,
Nicholas Joseph, Saurav Kadavath, Jackson Kernion,
Tom Conerly, Sheer El-Showk, Nelson Elhage, ZacHatfield-Dodds, Danny Hernandez, Tristan Hume,
Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Liane Lovitt, Neel
Nanda, Catherine Olsson, Dario Amodei, Tom
Brown, Jack Clark, Sam McCandlish, Chris Olah,
Ben Mann, and Jared Kaplan. 2022. Training a help-
ful and harmless assistant with reinforcement learn-
ing from human feedback.
Emily M. Bender, Timnit Gebru, Angelina McMillan-
Major, and Shmargaret Shmitchell. 2021. On the
dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language mod-
els be too big? In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Trans-
parency , FAccT ’21, page 610–623, New York, NY ,
USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Nicolas Berlinski, Margaret Doyle, Andrew M. Guess,
Gabrielle Levy, Benjamin Lyons, Jacob M. Mont-
gomery, Brendan Nyhan, and Jason Reifler. 2023.
The effects of unsubstantiated claims of voter fraud
on confidence in elections. Journal of Experimental
Political Science , 10(1):34–49.
D. J. Butler, J. Wulff, G. B. Stanley, and M. J. Black.
2012. A naturalistic open source movie for optical
flow evaluation. In European Conf. on Computer
Vision (ECCV) , Part IV , LNCS 7577, pages 611–625.
Springer-Verlag.
Andrea Ceron and Paride Carrara. 2023. Fact-checking,
reputation, and political falsehoods in italy and the
united states. New Media & Society , 25(3):540–558.
Gullal Singh Cheema, Sherzod Hakimov, Abdul Sittar,
Eric Müller-Budack, Christian Otto, and Ralph Ew-
erth. 2022. MM-claims: A dataset for multimodal
claim detection in social media. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL
2022 , pages 962–979, Seattle, United States. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Ido Dagan, Oren Glickman, and Bernardo Magnini.
2006. The pascal recognising textual entailment chal-
lenge. In Machine Learning Challenges. Evaluating
Predictive Uncertainty, Visual Object Classification,
and Recognising Tectual Entailment , pages 177–190,
Berlin, Heidelberg. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Anubrata Das, Houjiang Liu, Venelin Kovatchev, and
Matthew Lease. 2023. The state of human-centered
NLP technology for fact-checking. Information Pro-
cessing & Management , 60(2):103219.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages
4171–4186, Minneapolis, Minnesota. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi, Corey
Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan

--- PAGE 11 ---
Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe
Yu, Wenlong Huang, Yevgen Chebotar, Pierre Ser-
manet, Daniel Duckworth, Sergey Levine, Vincent
Vanhoucke, Karol Hausman, Marc Toussaint, Klaus
Greff, Andy Zeng, Igor Mordatch, and Pete Florence.
2023. Palm-e: An embodied multimodal language
model.
Alexander Fabbri, Irene Li, Tianwei She, Suyi Li, and
Dragomir Radev. 2019. Multi-news: A large-scale
multi-document summarization dataset and abstrac-
tive hierarchical model. In Proceedings of the 57th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 1074–1084, Florence, Italy. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Josh A. Goldstein, Girish Sastry, Micah Musser, Re-
nee DiResta, Matthew Gentzel, and Katerina Sedova.
2023. Generative language models and automated
influence operations: Emerging threats and potential
mitigations.
Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and
Weizhu Chen. 2023. Debertav3: Improving de-
berta using electra-style pre-training with gradient-
disentangled embedding sharing. In International
Conference on Learning Representations .
Andrew Jaegle, Sebastian Borgeaud, Jean-Baptiste
Alayrac, Carl Doersch, Catalin Ionescu, David Ding,
Skanda Koppula, Daniel Zoran, Andrew Brock, Evan
Shelhamer, Olivier J Henaff, Matthew Botvinick, An-
drew Zisserman, Oriol Vinyals, and Joao Carreira.
2022. Perceiver IO: A general architecture for struc-
tured inputs & outputs. In International Conference
on Learning Representations .
Andrew Jaegle, Felix Gimeno, Andy Brock, Oriol
Vinyals, Andrew Zisserman, and Joao Carreira. 2021.
Perceiver: General perception with iterative attention.
InProceedings of the 38th International Conference
on Machine Learning , volume 139 of Proceedings
of Machine Learning Research , pages 4651–4664.
PMLR.
Maurice Jakesch, Advait Bhat, Daniel Buschek, Lior
Zalmanson, and Mor Naaman. 2023a. Co-writing
with opinionated language models affects users’
views. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM.
Maurice Jakesch, Jeffrey T. Hancock, and Mor Naaman.
2023b. Human heuristics for AI-generated language
are flawed. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences , 120(11).
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Men-
sch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego
de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guil-
laume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao,
Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix,
and William El Sayed. 2023. Mistral 7b.Aman Khullar and Udit Arora. 2020. MAST: Multi-
modal abstractive summarization with trimodal hier-
archical attention. In Proceedings of the First Inter-
national Workshop on Natural Language Processing
Beyond Text , pages 60–69, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Sarah Kreps, R. Miles McCain, and Miles Brundage.
2022. All the news that’s fit to fabricate: Ai-
generated text as a tool of media misinforma-
tion. Journal of Experimental Political Science ,
9(1):104–117.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan
Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer Levy,
Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2020.
BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-training
for natural language generation, translation, and com-
prehension. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 7871–7880, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Chin-Yew Lin. 2004. ROUGE: A package for auto-
matic evaluation of summaries. In Text Summariza-
tion Branches Out , pages 74–81, Barcelona, Spain.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Shuaiqi Liu, Jiannong Cao, Ruosong Yang, and Zhiyuan
Wen. 2022. Long text and multi-table summarization:
Dataset and method. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 , pages
1995–2010, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Preslav Nakov, Giovanni Da San Martino, Tamer
Elsayed, Alberto Barrón-Cedeño, Rubén Míguez,
Shaden Shaar, Firoj Alam, Fatima Haouari, Maram
Hasanain, Watheq Mansour, Bayan Hamdan,
Zien Sheikh Ali, Nikolay Babulkov, Alex Nikolov,
Gautam Kishore Shahi, Julia Maria Struß, Thomas
Mandl, Mucahid Kutlu, and Yavuz Selim Kartal.
2021. Overview of the clef–2021 checkthat! lab
on detecting check-worthy claims, previously fact-
checked claims, and fake news. In Experimental IR
Meets Multilinguality, Multimodality, and Interac-
tion, pages 264–291, Cham. Springer International
Publishing.
Yixin Nie, Adina Williams, Emily Dinan, Mohit Bansal,
Jason Weston, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Adversarial
NLI: A new benchmark for natural language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 4885–4901, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Dan S. Nielsen and Ryan McConville. 2022. Mumin:
A large-scale multilingual multimodal fact-checked
misinformation social network dataset. In Proceed-
ings of the 45th International ACM SIGIR Confer-
ence on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval , SIGIR ’22, page 3141–3153, New York,
NY , USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John
Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller,
Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder,
Paul F Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022.
Training language models to follow instructions with
human feedback. In Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , volume 35, pages 27730–27744.
Curran Associates, Inc.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: A method for automatic evalu-
ation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics , ACL ’02, page 311–318, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ratish Puduppully and Mirella Lapata. 2021. Data-
to-text Generation with Macro Planning. Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 9:510–527.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Kather-
ine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the
limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
21(140):1–67.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec
Radford, and Oleg Klimov. 2017. Proximal policy
optimization algorithms.
Giovanni Spitale, Nikola Biller-Andorno, and Federico
Germani. 2023. Ai model gpt-3 (dis)informs us bet-
ter than humans. Science Advances , 9(26):eadh1850.
Rohan Taori, Ishaan Gulrajani, Tianyi Zhang, Yann
Dubois, Xuechen Li, Carlos Guestrin, Percy
Liang, and Tatsunori B. Hashimoto. 2023. Stan-
ford alpaca: An instruction-following llama
model. https://github.com/tatsu-lab/
stanford_alpaca .
James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos
Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. 2018.
FEVER: a large-scale dataset for fact extraction and
VERification. In NAACL-HLT .
Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier
Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix,
Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal
Azhar, Aurelien Rodriguez, Armand Joulin, Edouard
Grave, and Guillaume Lample. 2023a. Llama: Open
and efficient foundation language models.
Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Al-
bert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay
Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti
Bhosale, Dan Bikel, Lukas Blecher, Cristian Canton
Ferrer, Moya Chen, Guillem Cucurull, David Esiobu,
Jude Fernandes, Jeremy Fu, Wenyin Fu, Brian Fuller,
Cynthia Gao, Vedanuj Goswami, Naman Goyal, An-
thony Hartshorn, Saghar Hosseini, Rui Hou, HakanInan, Marcin Kardas, Viktor Kerkez, Madian Khabsa,
Isabel Kloumann, Artem Korenev, Punit Singh Koura,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Thibaut Lavril, Jenya Lee, Di-
ana Liskovich, Yinghai Lu, Yuning Mao, Xavier Mar-
tinet, Todor Mihaylov, Pushkar Mishra, Igor Moly-
bog, Yixin Nie, Andrew Poulton, Jeremy Reizen-
stein, Rashi Rungta, Kalyan Saladi, Alan Schelten,
Ruan Silva, Eric Michael Smith, Ranjan Subrama-
nian, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Binh Tang, Ross Tay-
lor, Adina Williams, Jian Xiang Kuan, Puxin Xu,
Zheng Yan, Iliyan Zarov, Yuchen Zhang, Angela Fan,
Melanie Kambadur, Sharan Narang, Aurelien Ro-
driguez, Robert Stojnic, Sergey Edunov, and Thomas
Scialom. 2023b. Llama 2: Open foundation and
fine-tuned chat models.
Juraj Vladika and Florian Matthes. 2023. Scientific
fact-checking: A survey of resources and approaches.
InFindings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 6215–6230, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix
Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel Bowman. 2018. GLUE:
A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for nat-
ural language understanding. In Proceedings of the
2018 EMNLP Workshop BlackboxNLP: Analyzing
and Interpreting Neural Networks for NLP , pages
353–355, Brussels, Belgium. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Fei Wang, Zhewei Xu, Pedro Szekely, and Muhao Chen.
2022a. Robust (controlled) table-to-text generation
with structure-aware equivariance learning. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North Amer-
ican Chapter of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , pages
5037–5048, Seattle, United States. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Suchen Wang, Yueqi Duan, Henghui Ding, Yap-Peng
Tan, Kim-Hui Yap, and Junsong Yuan. 2022b. Learn-
ing transferable human-object interaction detector
with natural language supervision. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 939–948.
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
tence understanding through inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1
(Long Papers) , pages 1112–1122. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Wen Xiao, Iz Beltagy, Giuseppe Carenini, and Arman
Cohan. 2022. PRIMERA: Pyramid-based masked
sentence pre-training for multi-document summariza-
tion. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5245–5263, Dublin,
Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Barry Menglong Yao, Aditya Shah, Lichao Sun, Jin-Hee
Cho, and Lifu Huang. 2023. End-to-end multimodal
fact-checking and explanation generation: A chal-
lenging dataset and models. In Proceedings of the
46th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Re-
search and Development in Information Retrieval .
ACM.
Jingqing Zhang, Yao Zhao, Mohammad Saleh, and Pe-
ter J. Liu. 2020. Pegasus: pre-training with extracted
gap-sentences for abstractive summarization. In Pro-
ceedings of the 37th International Conference on
Machine Learning , ICML’20. JMLR.org.
Tianyi Zhang*, Varsha Kishore*, Felix Wu*, Kilian Q.
Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2020. Bertscore: Eval-
uating text generation with bert. In International
Conference on Learning Representations .
Rui Zheng, Shihan Dou, Songyang Gao, Yuan Hua, Wei
Shen, Binghai Wang, Yan Liu, Senjie Jin, Qin Liu,
Yuhao Zhou, Limao Xiong, Lu Chen, Zhiheng Xi,
Nuo Xu, Wenbin Lai, Minghao Zhu, Cheng Chang,
Zhangyue Yin, Rongxiang Weng, Wensen Cheng,
Haoran Huang, Tianxiang Sun, Hang Yan, Tao Gui,
Qi Zhang, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuanjing Huang. 2023.
Secrets of rlhf in large language models part i: Ppo.
Dimitrina Zlatkova, Preslav Nakov, and Ivan Koychev.
2019. Fact-checking meets fauxtography: Verify-
ing claims about images. In Proceedings of the
2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 2099–2108, Hong Kong,
China. Association for Computational Linguistics.

--- PAGE 14 ---
9 Appendix
9.1 Prompting For
Multi-News-Fact-Checking Dataset
In this section, our main goal is to explain
the dataset construction process. The following
prompts include generating entailment, neutral, and
contradiction claims from the Multi-News memo-
rization dataset, ensuring each claim aligns with
its corresponding label, and providing clear and
concise claims, as depicted in Figure 6.
•Prompt for the entailment claims : Task:
You will be provided with a summary of a
news article. Your goal is to generate a list of
statements derived from the summary. These
statements should be definitively true based
solely on the information in the summary.
Example summary: The unemployment rate
dropped to 8.2% last month, but the economy
only added 120,000 jobs, when 203,000 new
jobs had been predicted, according to today’s
jobs report. Reaction on the Wall Street Jour-
nal’s MarketBeat Blog was swift: "Woah!!!
Bad number." The unemployment rate, how-
ever, is better news; it had been expected to
hold steady at 8.3%. But the AP notes that the
dip is mostly due to more Americans giving up
on seeking employment. You will be given a
summary of a news article. Your job is to gen-
erate a list of entailment claims(true) from the
summary. For example, if the summary says
job growth was expected to be 100,000 jobs,
but only was 80,000 jobs, one simple claim
you might write could be "Job growth missed
expectations." Please write a numbered list
of 10 claims from this summary (numbered 1.
through 10.).
•Prompt for the neutral claims : Task: You
will be provided with a summary of a news
article. Your goal is to generate a list of state-
ments derived from the summary. These state-
ments should not be definitively true or false
based solely on the information in the sum-
mary. In other words, they should be ambigu-
ous and require further investigation or con-
text to determine their accuracy. Example: If
the summary mentions that two celebrities are
planning to get divorced, you might create a
statement suggesting that their divorce might
lead to significant financial and legal com-
plications, assuming this information is notexplicitly confirmed or denied in the article.
Instructions: Review the provided summary.
Create 10 statements based on the informa-
tion in the summary. Each statement should
be carefully crafted to be neither definitively
true nor false based solely on the summary.
Ensure that the truth or falsehood of these
statements cannot be logically deduced from
the summary alone. Avoid simply rephras-
ing or restating sentences from the summary;
strive for creativity in your statement genera-
tion process. Avoid claims using statements
like "may" or "could" - your claim should state
things as a fact.
•Prompt for the contradiction claims : Task:
You will be provided with a summary of a
news article. Your goal is to generate a list of
statements derived from the summary. These
statements should be definitively false based
solely on the information in the summary. Ex-
ample: If the summary mentions that a black
race car starts up in front of a crowd of peo-
ple., you might create a statement suggesting
that a man is driving down a lonely road as-
suming this information is explicitly denied in
the article. Instructions: Review the provided
summary. Create 10 statements based on the
information in the summary. Each statement
should be carefully crafted to be definitively
false based solely on the summary. Avoid sim-
ply rephrasing or restating sentences from the
summary; strive for creativity in your state-
ment generation process. Avoid claims using
statements like "may" or "could" - your claim
should state things as a contradiction fact.
•Prompt for double-check claims : Task: You
will be presented with a set of documents and
one claim. Your objective is to discern the
claim label based on the information in the
documents. The claim labels include entail-
ment, neutral, and contradiction. Entailment
signifies that the claim is conclusively true
based solely on the documents. The neutral
label indicates that the claim should neither
be true nor false based on the information pro-
vided. The contradiction label implies that the
claim is entirely false based on the informa-
tion presented in the documents.
•Prompt for the clear and concise claims :
You will be provided a summary that a fact-

--- PAGE 15 ---
... James Holmes, the accused gunman in last Friday's midnight movie 
massacre in Colorado,
mailed a notebook "full of details about how he was going to kill people" 
to a University of Colorado psychiatrist before the attack,
and the parcel may have sat unopened in a mailroom for up to a week 
before its discovery Monday, a law enforcement source told 
FoxNews.com.
"Inside the package was a notebook full of details about how he was going 
to kill people," the source told FoxNews.com.
"There were drawings of what he was going to do in it --drawings and 
illustrations of the massacre."
Among the images shown in the spiral -bound notebook’s pages were gun -
wielding stick figures blowing away other stick figures.
The source said police and FBI agents were called to the University of 
Colorado Anschutz medical campus in Aurora on Monday morning after 
the psychiatrist,
who is also a professor at the school, reported receiving a package 
believed to be from the suspect.
Although that package turned out to be from someone else and harmless, a 
search of the Campus Services' mailroom turned up another package
sent to the psychiatrist with Holmes’ name in the return address, the 
source told FoxNews.com.
A second law enforcement source said authorities got a warrant from a 
county judge and took the package away Monday night.
When it was opened, its chilling contents were revealed. The first source 
on Tuesday told FoxNews.com the package had been in the mailroom 
since July 12,
though another source who confirmed the discovery to FoxNews.com 
could not say if the package arrived prior to Friday's massacre. ...Documents
#1 James Holmes mailed a notebook containing details about his planned massacre to a University of Colorado psychiatrist befo re the 
attack.
#2 The notebook included drawings and illustrations of the massacre.
#3 The psychiatrist received a package believed to be from the suspect, but it turned out to be from someone else and was har mless.
#4 A search of the Campus Services' mailroom revealed another package sent to the psychiatrist with Holmes' name in the retur n address.
#5 Authorities obtained a warrant and took the package away on Monday night.
#6 The package had been in the mailroom since July 12, but it was not delivered to the psychiatrist.
#7 The contents of the package were chilling and included details about how Holmes planned to kill people.
#8 The notebook is now in possession of the FBI.
#9 The University of Colorado Denver confirmed that a suspicious package was found, but disputed the July 12 timeline.
#10The package was delivered on Monday and found on the same day.
#1 The notebook sent by James Holmes to a University of Colorado psychiatrist contains detailed plans for a mass shooting.
#2 The drawings and illustrations in the notebook depict the scene of the massacre that took place on Friday.
#3 James Holmes had been planning the attack for a week or longer.
#4 The package sent to the psychiatrist was delivered on July 12, before the massacre took place.
#5 James Holmes intended to harm the psychiatrist who received the package.
#6 The FBI has taken possession of the notebook and is investigating its contents.
#7 The second law enforcement source who confirmed the discovery of the package to FoxNews.com is an FBI agent.
#8 The package was delivered to the psychiatrist's office, but it was not opened until Monday night.
#9 The chilling contents of the package were revealed when it was opened on Monday night.
#10 The University of Colorado Denver's statement confirming the discovery of a suspicious package is a cover -up for the school' s failure 
to respond appropriately to the threat posed by James Holmes.
#1 James Holmes did not mail a notebook containing details about his planned massacre to a University of Colorado psychiatris t.
#2 The package sent to the psychiatrist did not contain drawings and illustrations of the massacre.
#3 The notebook did not include details about how Holmes planned to kill people.
#4 The package was not delivered to the psychiatrist's office.
#5 The FBI did not take possession of the notebook.
#6 The University of Colorado Denver did not issue a statement confirming the discovery of a suspicious package.
#7 Holmes did not intend to harm the psychiatrist who received the package.
#8 The package was not sent from someone else and was not harmless.
#9 Authorities did not obtain a warrant from a county judge to take the package away.
#10 The package did not contain chilling contents when it was opened.Entailment claims
Neutral claims
Contradiction claimsFigure 6: The prompted entailment, neutral, contradiction claims from Llama-2-70b.
checker will use for fact-checking a claim.
Your task is to evaluate the provided summary
using a quality assessment metric that mea-
sures whether the summary is factual and writ-
ten in a clear and concise manner. Good sum-
maries provide facts useful for fact-checking
(a general claim) and are short to ease the
fact-checkers job. Given a summary, your
job is to provide a number from 0 to 1 that
indicates your assessment of the quality of
the summary. Provide the evaluation score in
the format: "The quality score is <score>."
The score should range from 0 to 1, where a
score of 1 indicates high quality and a score
of 0 signifies the lowest quality. The provided
summary: <summary>"
9.2 Implementation Details
We used 4 NVIDIA A40 to run our experiments.
Our model costs 180 GB and are trained for about
24 runs with a batch size of 256. In the pre-
processing and evaluation parts, we use NLTK,
ROUGE, and BERTScore. For claim verification,
the learning rate ∈ {10−4,10−5,10−6}and batch
size∈ {256,480,512}.

--- PAGE 16 ---
A woman in her 40s scared of f burglars
during a break-in at her suburban Los
Angeles home, known for its use in
"The Brady Bunch" TV show . The
suspects entered by breaking a sliding
glass door , ransacked the den, and
attempted to enter the woman's
bedroom. She and her toddler awoke
and turned on a light, causing the
intruders to flee.  The house, a popular
spot for fans and "Pokemon Go"
players, features an exterior chosen by
the show's creator , Sherwood Schwartz.
No arrests have been made, but
physical evidence was left behind.A woman in her 40s scared of f burglars
during a break-in at her suburban Los
Angeles home, known for its use in "The
Brady Bunch" TV show . The suspects
entered by breaking a sliding glass door ,
ransacked the den, and attempted to
enter the woman's bedroom. She turned
on a light, causing the intruders to flee.
The house, a popular spot for fans and
"Pokemon Go" players, features an
exterior chosen by the show's creator ,
Sherwood Schwartz. No arrests have
been made, but physical evidence was left
behind.
News article:   A woman in her 40s, who resides in the
suburban Los Angeles home made famous by the TV sitcom
"The Brady Bunch," scared of f burglars during a "hot prowl"
break-in, police reported Thursday . The break-in occurred
Wednesday night at the Studio City property , which was used
for exterior shots of the show that aired from 1969 to 1974.
The suspects gained entry by smashing a downstairs sliding
glass door and ransacked the den before heading upstairs
and breaking into the woman's bedroom. The woman and her
children awoke and turned on a light, causing the intruders to
flee. She was unharmed, and it remains unclear if any
property was stolen. The home, a popular stop for fans and
"Pokemon Go" players, frequently attracts visitors. Although
the house's interior is dif ferent from the show , which was
filmed on a Paramount Studios set, its exterior was chosen by
the show's creator , Sherwood Schwartz, to reflect a home
suitable for an architect. No arrests have been made, but
physical evidence was left behind by the suspects.
Generated summary
with vision informationGenerated summary
without vision
informationFigure 7: The assessment of generated summaries with and without visual information.
