# 2409.14924.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: ./document-conflict/2409.14924.pdf
# File size: 2113832 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) and Beyond: A Comprehensive
Survey on How to Make your LLMs use External Data More Wisely
A P REPRINT
Siyun Zhao , Yuqing Yang , Zilong Wang, Zhiyuan He, Luna K. Qiu, Lili Qiu
Microsoft Research Asia
{siyunzhao,yuqing.yang,wangzilong,zhiyuan.he,lunaqiu,liliqiu}@microsoft.com
ABSTRACT
Large language models (LLMs) augmented with external data have demonstrated remarkable capa-
bilities in completing real-world tasks. External data not only bolsters the models’ domain-specific
expertise and temporal relevance but also diminishes incidences of hallucination, thereby enhancing
both the controllability and interpretability of outputs. Techniques for integrating external data into
LLMs, such as Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) and fine-tuning, are gaining increasing atten-
tion and widespread application. Nonetheless, the effective deployment of data-augmented LLMs
across various specialized fields presents substantial challenges. These challenges encompass a wide
range of issues, from retrieving relevant data and accurately interpreting user intent to fully harnessing
the reasoning capabilities of LLMs for complex tasks. We believe that there is no one-size-fits-all
solution for data-augmented LLM applications. In practice, underperformance often arises from a
failure to correctly identify the core focus of a task or because the task inherently requires a blend of
multiple capabilities that must be disentangled for better resolution. In this survey, we propose a RAG
task categorization method, classifying user queries into four levels based on the type of external data
required and the task’s primary focus: explicit fact queries, implicit fact queries, interpretable ratio-
nale queries, and hidden rationale queries. We define these levels of queries, provide relevant datasets,
and summarize the key challenges and most effective techniques for addressing these challenges.
Finally, we discuss three main forms of integrating external data into LLMs: context, small model,
and fine-tuning, highlighting their respective strengths, limitations, and the types of problems they
are suited to solve. This work aims to help readers thoroughly understand and decompose the data
requirements and key bottlenecks in building LLM applications, offering solutions to the different
challenges and serving as a guide to systematically developing such applications.
1 Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities, including extensive world knowledge and
sophisticated reasoning skills. Despite these advancements, there are significant challenges in effectively deploying
them across various specialized fields. These challenges include issues like model hallucinations, misalignment with
domain-specific knowledge, among others. Incorporating domain-specific data, particularly private or on-premise data
that could not be included in their initial training corpus, is crucial for tailoring LLM applications to meet specific
industry needs. Through techniques like RAG and fine tuning, data augmented LLM applications have demonstrated
advantages over applications built solely on generic LLMs, in several aspects:
•Enhanced Professionalism and Timeliness: The data used to train LLMs often lags in timeliness and
may not cover all domains comprehensively, especially proprietary data owned by users. Data augmented
LLM applications address this issue by providing more detailed and accurate answers for complex questions,
allowing for data updates and customization.
•Alignment with Domain Experts: Through the use of and learning from domain-specific data, data augmented
LLM applications can exhibit capabilities more like domain experts, such as doctors and lawyers.arXiv:2409.14924v1  [cs.CL]  23 Sep 2024

--- PAGE 2 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
•Reduction in Model Hallucination: Data augmented LLM applications generate responses based on real
data, grounding their reactions in facts and significantly minimizing the possibility of hallucinations.
•Improved Controllability and Explainability: The data used can serve as a reference for the model’s
predictions, enhancing both controllability and explainability.
Despite the enthusiasm for these advancements, developers often struggle and have to invest a significant amount
of human labor to meet its expectations ( e.g., achieving a high success rate in question answering). Numerous
studies [ 1,2,3,4,5] highlight the challenges and frustrations involved in constructing a data augmented LLM
applications based on technologies like RAG and fine-tuning, particularly in specialized domains such as the legal field,
healthcare, manufacturing, and others.
These challenges span a wide range, from constructing data pipelines ( e.g., data processing and indexing) to leveraging
LLMs’ capabilities to achieve complex intelligent reasoning. For example, in applications of finance, there is a frequent
need to understand and utilize high-dimensional time series data, whereas in healthcare, medical images or time-series
medical records are often essential. Enabling LLMs to comprehend these varied forms of data represents a recurring
challenge. On the other hand, in legal and mathematical applications, LLMs typically struggle to grasp long-distance
dependencies between different structures. Additionally, depending on the specific application domain, there are
increased demands for the interpretability and consistency of LLM responses. The inherent nature of LLMs tends
to be characterized by low interpretability and high uncertainty, which poses significant challenges. Enhancing the
transparency of LLMs and reducing their uncertainty are critical for increasing trust and reliability in their outputs,
especially in fields where precision and accountability are paramount.
Through extensive discussions with domain experts and developers, and by carefully analyzing the challenges they
face, we have gained a deep understanding that data augmented LLM applicationsis not a one-size-fits-all solution. The
real-world demands, particularly in expert domains, are highly complex and can vary significantly in their relationship
with given data and the reasoning difficulties they require. However, developers often do not realize these distinctions
and end up with a solution full of performance pitfalls (akin to a house with leaks everywhere). In contrast, if we could
fully understand the demands at different levels and their unique challenges, we could build applications accordingly
and make the application steadily improve (like constructing a solid and reliable house step by step).
Yet, research efforts and existing relevant surveys [ 6,7,8,9,10,11,12,13] frequently focus on only one of these
levels or a particular topic of technologies. This has motivated us to compile this comprehensive survey, which aims to
clearly define these different levels of queries, identify the unique challenges associated with each(Figure 1) , and list
related works and efforts addressing them. This survey is intended to help readers construct a bird’s-eye view of data
augmented LLM applications and also serve as a handbook on how to approach the development of such applications
systematically.
2 Problem Definition
Data-augmented LLM applications can take many forms, ranging from the frequently seen Question-Answering bots
based on domain-specific data, to semantic processing operators within complex data pipelines, or even agents handling
specific steps in a multi-agent system. However, in general, a data-augmented LLM application can be formulated as
follows:
f:QD− → A (1)
whereQ,A, andDrepresent the user’s input (Query), the expected response (Answer), and the given data, respectively.
The task of the application fis to establish the mapping from QtoAbased on D.
In contrast to standalone LLM systems that rely solely on pre-existing knowledge, data augmented LLM applications
are characterized by their reliance on external data ( D) to accurately address the posed queries ( Q). The incorporation of
external data Dcan significantly bolster the capabilities of LLMs, granting them the ability to tap into current, domain-
specific knowledge and to understand expert rationales. Queries can be stratified into various levels of complexity based
on the extent and manner in which they utilize external data, reflecting the depth and nature of engagement required by
the queries.
2.1 Stratification of Queries
In the landscape of data-augmented LLM applications, queries can be stratified based on their complexity and the depth
of data interaction required. This stratification helps in understanding the varying levels of cognitive processing that an
LLM must perform to generate accurate and relevant responses. From straightforward fact retrieval to the nuanced
interpretation of implicit knowledge, each level represents a step up in the sophistication of the tasks that LLMs are
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
Figure 1: Main Focus of Four Level Queries
expected to handle. Below, we delineate these levels, providing insights into the unique challenges and capabilities
necessitated at each stage.
Level-1 Explicit Facts : These queries are asking about explicit facts directly present in the given data without
requiring any additional reasoning. This is the simplest form of query, where the model’s task is primarily to
locate and extract the relevant information. For example, "Where will the 2024 Summer Olympics be held?"
targets a fact contained in the external data.
Level-2 Implicit Facts : These queries ask about implicit facts in the data, which are not immediately obvious and
may require some level of common sense reasoning or basic logical deductions. The necessary information
might be spread across multiple segments or require simple inferencing. For instance, the question "What is
the majority party now in the country where Canberra is located?" can be answered by combining the fact
that Canberra is in Australia with the information about the current majority party in Australia.
Level-3 Interpretable Rationales : These queries demand not only a grasp of the factual content but also the capacity
to comprehend and apply domain-specific rationales that are integral to the data’s context. These rationales
are often explicitly provided in external resources and is typically not present or rarely encountered during the
pre-training phase of a general large language model. For example, in the realm of pharmaceuticals, an LLM
must interpret FDA Guidance1documents—which represent the FDA’s current thinking—to evaluate whether
a specific drug application adheres to regulatory requirements. Similarly, in customer support scenarios, the
LLM must navigate the intricacies of a predefined workflow to process user inquiries effectively. In the medical
field, many diagnostic manuals provide authoritative and standardized diagnostic criteria, such as management
guidelines for patients with acute chest pain [ 14]. By effectively following these external rationales, it is
possible to develop a specialized LLM expert system for managing chest pain. This involves understanding
the procedural steps and decision trees that guide a support agent’s interactions with customers, ensuring
responses are not only accurate but also comply with the company’s service standards and protocols.
Level-4 Hidden Rationales : This category of queries delves into the more challenging realm where the rationales are
not explicitly documented but must be inferred from patterns and outcomes observed in external data. The
hidden rationales here refer not only to the implicit reasoning chains and logical relationships, but also to the
inherently challenging and non-trivial task of identifying and extracting the external rationales required for
each specific query. In IT operational scenarios, for example, a cloud operations team may have addressed
numerous incidents in the past, each with its own unique set of circumstances and resolutions. The LLM must
be adept at mining this rich repository of tacit knowledge to discern the implicit strategies and decision-making
1https://www.fda.gov/industry/fda-basics-industry/guidances
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
Figure 2: Summary of Query Levels in Data augmented LLM applications
processes that were successful. Similarly, in software development, the debugging history of previous bugs
can provide a wealth of implicit insights. While the step-by-step rationale for each debugging decision may
not be systematically recorded, the LLM must be capable of extracting the underlying principles that guided
those decisions. By synthesizing these hidden rationales, the LLM can generate responses that are not only
accurate but also reflective of the unspoken expertise and problem-solving approaches that have been honed
over time by experienced professionals.
In summary, the classification of queries into levels reflects a gradient of complexity and the type of understanding
required from the LLM. As shown in Figure 1 and exampled by Figure 2, the first two levels, Explicit Facts and
Implicit Facts , focus on the retrieval of factual information, whether directly stated or requiring basic inferencing.
These levels challenge the LLM’s ability to extract and synthesize data into coherent facts. Conversely, the latter two
levels, Interpretable Rationales andHidden Rationales , shift the focus towards the LLM’s capacity to learn and
apply the rationales behind the data. These levels demand a deeper cognitive engagement, where the LLM must align
with expert thinking or extract wisdom from unstructured historical data, respectively. The classification of common
factual querying datasets according to this standard is depicted in Table 1.
Each level presents its unique set of challenges and, consequently, necessitates tailored solutions to effectively address
them. As we delve into the intricacies of these levels in the following sections, we will explore the specific strategies
and methodologies that enable LLMs to navigate the complexities of data-augmented applications across these varied
spectrums of query types. This exploration will not only highlight the current capabilities of LLMs but also shed light
on the ongoing advancements and potential future developments in the field.
3 Explicit Fact Queries (L1)
3.1 Overview
Explicit fact queries, represent the most straightforward type of data-augmented queries. Queries at this level can be
answered by directly accessing specific domain documents or document snippets within the collection. The answers to
these questions are often in plain text within the documents, requiring minimal reasoning or simple rationale in the
response generation.
The defining characteristic of this level is the clear and direct dependency on specific pieces of external data.
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
Task Categorization Datasets levels Mutiple References
QANQ(Natural Questions)[15] 1 - Explicit Facts False
MS MARCO [16] 1 - Explicit Facts False
TriviaQA[17] 1 - Explicit Facts False
SQuAD [18] 1 - Explicit Facts False
ASQA [19] 1 - Explicit Facts False
WebQSP [20] 1 - Explicit Facts False
HotPotQA[21] 2 - Implicit Facts True
2WikiMultiHopQA[22] 2 - Implicit Facts True
MuSiQue[23] 2 - Implicit Facts True
Bamboogle[24] 2 - Implicit Facts True
StrategyQA[25] 2 - Implicit Facts True
ComplexWebQuestions [26] 2 - Implicit Facts True
WebQuestions [27] 2 - Implicit Facts True
Mintaka [28] 2 - Implicit Facts True
MetaQA [29] 2 - Implicit Facts True
qasper [30] 2 - Implicit Facts True
DROP [31] 2 - Implicit Facts True
Multi-Choice QuALITY [32] 2 - Implicit Facts True
Fact Checking Feverous[33] 2 - Implicit Facts True
Table 1: Stratification of Common Datasets Providing Facts
3.1.1 Data Dependency
The dataset Dcan be segmented into documents or segments, denoted as D1, D2, . . . , D n, in various ways:
D={D1, D2, . . . , D n} (2)
Each segment Diis considered relatively short and contains content that is more focused and specific2.
For a given query q∈ Q, not every segment within Dis requisite for formulating a response. Let δ:Q × D → { 0,1}
denote the necessity of data segment d∈ D for a specific query q, where δ(q, d) = 1 means that data segment dis
required to answer the query q, andδ(q, d) = 0 otherwise. Then the data dependency of query q, characterized by the
subset of segments indispensable for addressing query q, is defined as:
Dep (q) ={d|d∈ D andδ(q, d) = 1} (3)
It’s easy to understand that Dep (q)∈ P (D), where P(D)is the power set3ofD.
3.1.2 Definition
Explicit fact queries, denoted as Q1, are characterized by the direct retrievability of answers from specific data segments
within the dataset D. These queries can be formally defined in the context of a data-augmented LLM system as follows:
For any query qand its corresponding answer a, an explicit fact query is one where there exists:
•A retrieval component rD:Q → P (D)that identifies the relevant data segments from Dnecessary to answer
q. This component ensures that rD(q)closely matches Dep (q), the minimal subset of Drequired to respond
toq.
•A response generator θ, typically a prompted LLM inference, that constructs the answer abased solely on the
information retrieved by rD. The response θ(rD(q))should be equal to or approximate a, demonstrating the
query’s reliance on explicit, directly accessible facts.
2In some most recent advancements, the segment size may be as large as a whole document or even larger
3The power set (or powerset) of a set Sis the set of all subsets of S, including the empty set and Sitself.
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
This definition underscores the reliance of explicit fact querieson direct data retrieval without the need for complex
reasoning or inference beyond the scope of the identified data segments.
Here are some examples of queries at this level:
•What method was used in Paper X to solve problem Y? (given a collection of academic papers)
•What’s the AI strategy of company X? (given a series of the latest news and articles about company X)
3.2 Challenges and Solutions
Queries at this level primarily necessitate the correct retrieval of data for LLMs to provide accurate responses. RAG [ 6],
due to its effectiveness, flexibility, and relatively low costs, is the most commonly adopted technical solution for
handling this level of queries. However, even with RAG, there are significant challenges in constructing a robust and
high-quality system. These challenges include:
•Data Processing Difficulties : External data is often highly unstructured and contains multi-modal components
such as tables, images, videos, and more. Additionally, the process of segmenting or "chunking" this data
presents challenges in maintaining the original context and meaning.
•Data Retrieval Difficulties : The retrieval of relevant data segments from a large, unstructured dataset can be
computationally intensive and prone to errors. The challenge lies in developing efficient and accurate retrieval
mechanisms.
•Evaluation Difficulties : Evaluating the performance of a RAG system, particularly at a component level, is
a complex task. It requires the development of robust metrics that can accurately assess the quality of data
retrieval and response generation.
Given the popularity of RAG, a wealth of literature and tools have been developed to address these challenges. In
the remainder of this section, we will highlight some of the most practical and impactful enhancements to RAG.
Additionally, we will discuss alternative technical solutions that may be employed beyond RAG.
3.3 Retrieval-augmented Generation (RAG)
Retrieval-Augmented Generation refers to a methodology where a language model augments its natural language
generation capabilities by dynamically retrieving external information during the generation process. This technique
blends the generative capabilities of LLMs with the information retrieval from extensive databases or documents. The
process is typically implemented as data index construction, retrieval system construction and answer generation.
3.3.1 Data Processing Enhancement
Document parsing at this level often involves extracting information from text, tables, and figures in a coherent manner,
ensuring that the relevant snippets are accurately identified and retrieved.
Multi-modal Documents Parsing Addressing multi-modal content in source documents, such as charts, tables, or
even videos (e.g. meeting recordings), is one of the most frequently asked questions. Broadly, two approaches are
employed to tackle this issue. The first approach involves converting multi-modal content into textual form. For instance,
Table-to-Text methods [ 34] translate tables into text, while other techniques convert visual content into textual or
attribute-based descriptions [ 35,36], which are subsequently processed by large language models. The second approach
leverages multi-modal embedding techniques [ 37,38,39], utilizing the retrieved embeddings from multi-modal data as
soft prompts for input.
Chunking Optimization For long texts, segmenting documents into text chunks is a common and necessary operation.
Larger text chunks can preserve more of the semantic coherence of the context, but they also tend to contain more noise
within each chunk[ 40]. Commonly-used chunking strategies [ 41,42] include fixed size chunking, recursive chunking,
sliding window chunking, paragraph-based chunking ,semantic chunking, etc. Certain methods are designed to ascertain
the level of detail a query demands and, based on this identification, select text chunks of appropriate granularity for
retrieval[ 43,44]. Alternatively, some methods opt to process and refine the text into smaller segments that maintain a
high degree of information completeness[ 45]. Additionally, there are approaches that employ vision models to segment
text in accordance with the original document structure[46].
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
3.3.2 Data Retrieval Enhancement
Information Retrieval (IR) techniques can be smoothly transferred into RAG applicaitons. The primary steps involved
include establishing data indexes, processing queries, retrieving and matching, re-ranking, and evaluation.
Indexing The purpose of this step is to establish mappings from search terms to text segments, determining the logic by
which the retrieval system operates. Indexing methods are broadly classified into three types: sparse, dense, and hybrid
retrieval. Sparse retrieval uses specific words to index text segments. In contrast, dense retrieval maps text segments
into a dense vector space of features. Hybrid retrieval combines elements of both sparse and dense techniques.
•Sparse Retrieval : This was the first indexing method to be widely adopted due to its simplicity and intuitiveness.
Techniques like TF-IDF and BM25[ 47,48] are designed to identify the most representative keywords of each
text segment based on their relative frequency. These methods are still prevalent in many RAG projects[ 49,
50,51]. However, word matching methods can lead to retrieval losses due to their inability to recognize
synonyms. To address this issue, methods like KNN can be used for similarity-based matching of keywords
[52]. Alternatively, indices like keywords can be changed into the prediction of the probabilities of query
tokens for the corresponding text segment[53, 54].
•Dense Retrieval : This approach often involves using pre-trained or fine-tuned text encoders to map texts to
a dense vector space that aligns with query requirements. BERT-based encoders [ 55] are commonly to be
fine-tuned as dense retriever on unsupervised data using methods such as DPR[ 56], ANCE[ 57], SimCSE[ 58]
and TAS-B[ 59]. Others employ unsupervised contrastive learning for fine-tuning, such as Contriever[ 60].
Using feedback from LLMs to guide the training objectives of retrievers can also effectively enhance the
retriever’s suitability for LLMs [ 61,62,63]. Given the powerful capabilities and expressive potential of
LLMs, LLM-based dense retrieval has recently emerged as a key area of interest and exploration [ 64].
LLM2vec [ 65] modifies the attention mechanism of a pre-trained LLM to a bidirectional one and employs the
masked next-token prediction method for unsupervised training, resulting in an LLM-based dense retrieval
embedder. Similarly, Llama2Vec [ 66] leverages two pretext tasks—Embedding-Based Auto-Encoding and
Embedding-Based Auto-Regression—to train an unsupervised dense retrieval encoder based on the LLaMA
architecture [67], leading to significant improvements in retrieval task performance.
•Others : Combining sparse retrieval and dense retrieval is an effective method to focus simultaneously on
the central theme of text segments and global features. Feng et al. (2023) propose initially determining the
knowledge domain needed to answer a query as a fixed area of expertise, and then using dense retrieval to
recall supplementary information within this domain [ 68]. Numerous studies have explored various methods
of blending dense vector indexing with sparse encoder indexing to better capture the semantic information of
text blocks and enhance the precision of targeted paragraph retrieval [69, 70, 71]. On the other hand, Tang et
al. (2024) have enhanced the capabilities of a LLM by fine-tuning it for indexing and retrieving, effectively
integrating these abilities directly into the LLM. This allows the LLM to autonomously generate data indices
and text segments for each query [72, 73].
Query Document Alignment The goal of this step is to align the query with document segments in external data to
identify the best document segment that can assist in answering the query. As Figure 3 illustrated, there are primarily
three approaches to this alignment: traditional alignment, document domain alignment, and query domain alignment.
Traditional alignment involves mapping both document segments and the query into the same encoding space. For
instance, many dense retrieval architectures based on dual encoders feature specialized query encoders [ 56,57,59].
Conversely, if a system like RAG employs sparse retrieval, it is necessary to extract keywords from the query for the
search. Further refinement can be achieved through query rewriting techniques, which enhance search accuracy by
mitigating issues related to user terminological inaccuracies or vague descriptions, effectively improving the precision
of the search results [ 74]. Document domain alignment involves generating synthetic answers first, then using these
answers to recall relevant data, effectively addressing the issue of queries and retrieved data not being in the same
distribution space. A notable work in this area is HyDE [ 75]. Query domain alignment [ 76] involves generating a set of
synthetic questions for each atomic unit of text, mapping text segments into the query space, and then retrieving the
synthetic questions closest to the original query along with their corresponding text segments. This method ensures
that the most relevant and contextually appropriate segments are selected for responding to the query. SlimPLM [ 77]
employs a small proxy model to generate heuristic answers, which are then used to predict the knowledge needed to
answer the question. This approach also provides an effective method for aligning queries to the document space.
Re-ranking and Correction After retrieving the top k text blocks, RAG systems must filter and reorder these segments.
Most RAG systems use the relevance scores provided by the retriever as the basis for ranking, while some studies
employ specific metrics such as perplexity or perplexity gain as ranking criteria [ 78,79]. Other efforts involve using
LLMs to evaluate the credibility and utility of retrieved text blocks, training a pluggable reward-driven contextual
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
Figure 3: Three Types of Query-Document Alignment
adapter to refine the output of retriever[ 80]. Additionally, some research focuses on pre-training a small language model
dedicated to fact verification, which is used to filter out incorrect retrieved text chunks, thus improving the quality of
the recalled text[81].
Recursive Retrieval or Iterative Retrieval Considering the inherent limitations in the accuracy of a single retrieval
attempt, an effective mitigation strategy is to perform multiple retrievals to progressively address any omissions. Kim et
al. (2023) introduced a tree-like recursive retrieval method, incorporating pruning strategies to incrementally break
down ambiguous questions into disambiguated ones, ultimately arriving at the closest correct answer [ 82]. Similarly,
SEATER uses the k-means algorithm to construct a hierarchical tree structure of items to be retrieved, and iteratively
recalls nodes within the tree structure [83].
3.3.3 Response Generation Enhancement
Generating responses requires determining if the retrieved information is sufficient or if additional external data is
needed. Handling conflicts between retrieved knowledge and the model’s internal prior knowledge is also essential
[84,85,86]. Supervised fine-tuning is an effective method to enhance the generation performance in RAG systems.
When faced with irrelevant or erroneous information as the retrieved context, pre-trained large language models are
often easily misled, resulting in incorrect responses. Many studies have shown that by subtly designing training data
for RAG systems, fine-tuning or pretraining can effectively mitigate this issue [ 87,88,89]. Through experimental
analysis, RAAT [ 89], demonstrated that the detrimental effects of irrelevant retrieval noise, relevant retrieval noise, and
counterfactual retrieval noise on RAG models increase progressively. By incorporating with these training process,
these methods enables the LLM to internally recognize noisy contexts, leading to significant improvements in response
generation quality even in the presence of noisy retrievals. Furthermore, to ensure more consistent performance between
the retriever and generator within the RAG system, some studies employ joint training of both retriever and generator
during the training phase [90, 91, 92].
4 Implicit Fact Queries (L2)
4.1 Overview
These queries involve data dependencies that are not immediately obvious and may require some level of common
sense reasoning or basic logical deductions. The necessary information might be spread across multiple segments or
require simple inferencing. (Example in Figure 2)
Queries at this level require gathering and processing information from multiple documents within the collection. The
collection of required information may exceed the ability of a single retrieval request, necessitating the decomposition
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
of the original query into multiple retrieval operations and the aggregation of results into a comprehensive answer. This
level often involves common-sense reasoning without requiring domain-specific expertise. This type of queries may
include statistical queries, descriptive analysis queries, and basic aggregation queries. For example, operations such as
counting, comparison, trend analysis, and selective summarization are common in "how many" and "what’s the most"
type queries, while multi-hop reasoning is frequently used. Therefore, we can define the level-2 queries, Q2as follows:
For any query qand its corresponding answer a, aQ2fact query is one where:
•There exists a set of explicit fact queries {q1, q2, . . . , q m} ⊂ Q 1, each of which can be directly retrieved from
specific data segments within the dataset D, such that:
rD(q) =m[
i=1rD(qi)
where rD(qi)identifies the relevant data segments from Dnecessary to answer qi, and the union of these
segments provides the information necessary to answer q.
•A response generator θ, typically a prompted LLM inference, constructs the answer atoqby aggregating
the responses {θ(rD(q1)), θ(rD(q2)), . . . , θ (rD(qm))}and applying common-sense reasoning to derive an
answer that is not explicitly stated in the data. The response θ(rD(q))should approximate the correct answer
a, demonstrating that the query qcan be effectively answered through the aggregation of responses to the Q1
queries.
This definition underscores the reliance of Q2queries on the ability to decompose complex queries into a set of simpler,
explicit fact queries Q1, whose answers can then be combined to generate the correct response to the original query Q2.
Here are some examples of queries at this level:
•How many experiments have sample sizes greater than 1000? (given a collection of experimental records)
•What are the top 3 most frequently mentioned symptoms? (given a collection of medical records)
•What’s the difference between the AI strategies of company X and company Y? (given a series of the latest
news and articles about companies X and Y)
4.2 Challenges and Solutions
At this level, queries still revolve around factual questions, but the answers are not explicitly presented in any single text
passage. Instead, they require combining multiple facts through common-sense reasoning to arrive at a conclusion. The
challenges of a level-2 query primarily include:
•Adaptive retrieval volumes : Different questions may require varying numbers of retrieved contexts, and the
specific number of retrieved contexts can depend on both the question and the dataset. A fixed number of
retrievals may result in either information noise or insufficient information.
•Coordination between reasoning and retrieval : Reasoning can guide the focus of what needs to be retrieved,
while the insights gained from retrieved information can iteratively refine reasoning strategies. Addressing
these complexities calls for an intelligent integration and selective harnessing of external data, capitalizing on
the inherent reasoning prowess of LLMs.
Methods to address challenges at this level include iterative RAG, RAG on graph/tree, and RAG with SQL, among
others.
4.3 Iterative RAG
Implicit fact queries is similar to multi-hop RAG tasks. This category of methods dynamically controls multi-step RAG
processes, iteratively gathering or correcting information until the correct answer is achieved.
•Planning-based : Generating a stepwise retrieval plan during the prior-retrieval stage or dynamically within
the retrieval process can refine the focus of each retrieval, efficiently guiding the iterative RAG system. For
example, ReAct [ 93] progressively updates the target of each step, reducing the knowledge gap required
to answer the question. IRCoT [ 94] and RAT[ 95] uses a Chain of Thought to guide the RAG pipeline,
making decisions about the current retrieval target based on previously recalled information. GenGround [ 96]
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
enables LLMs to alternate between two stages until arriving at the final answer: (1) generating a simpler
single-step question and producing a direct answer, and (2) tracing the question-answer pair back to the
retrieved documents to verify and correct any inaccuracies in the predictions. This iterative process ensures
more reliable and accurate responses.
•Information Gap Filling Based : ITRG [ 97] introduces an iterative retrieval-generation collaboration framework,
generating answers based on existing knowledge and then continuing to retrieve and generate for the unknown
parts of the response in subsequent rounds. Similarly, FLARE [ 50] revisits and modifies low-probability
tokens in answers generated in each iteration. On the other hand, Self-RAG [ 92] fine-tunes a large model to
autonomously decide when to search and when to stop searching and start answering questions.
4.4 Graph/ Tree Question Answering
Addressing implicit fact queriesrequires synthesizing information from multiple references. Graphs or trees, whether
knowledge-based or data-structured, naturally express the relational structure among texts, making them highly suitable
for this type of data retrieval problem.
•Traditional Knowledge Graph : One of the initial structures considered for enhancing the efficacy of LLMs
is the traditional knowledge graph, where each node represents an entity and edges between nodes signify the
relationships between these entities.
[98] proposed a forward-looking development roadmap for LLMs and Knowledge Graphs (KGs) comprising:
1) KG-enhanced LLMs, which integrate KGs during the pre-training and inference phases of LLMs to deepen
the models’ understanding of acquired knowledge; 2) LLM-enhanced KGs, which employ LLMs for various
KG tasks such as embedding, completion, construction, graph-to-text generation, and question answering; and
3) collaborative LLMs+KGs approaches, where both LLMs and KGs play complementary roles, enhancing
each other through bidirectional inference driven by data and knowledge. The Rigel-KQGA model [ 99], is an
end-to-end KGQA model that predicts the necessary knowledge graph nodes based on a query and combines
this with an LLM to derive answers. Works like Think-on-Graph [ 100] and KnowledgeNavigator [ 101]
extract entities involved in a query and then perform iterative BFS searches on the graph, using the LLM as a
thinking machine to determine the optimal exploration path and perform pruning. The R3[102]introduces
several possible commonsense axioms via an LLM that could address a query, sequentially searching related
knowledge subgraphs to assess if the current information suffices to answer the query, continuing until the
question is resolved.
•Data Chunk Graph/ Tree : The impressive reading comprehension capabilities of LLMs enable them to
effectively grasp text without needing to break it down into the finest granularities of entities and relationships.
In this context, researchers have begun experimenting with using text chunks or data chunks as nodes
on graphs or trees, employing edges to represent either high-level or more intricately designed relations.
Knowledge-Graph-Prompting [ 103] discusses three popular kinds of questions that require mining implicit
facts from (a) bridging questions rely on sequential reasoning while (b) comparing questions rely on parallel
reasoning over different passages. (c) structural questions rely on fetching contents in the corresponding
document structures. To tackle these questions, Knowledge-Graph-Prompting utilizes entity recognition,
TF-IDF, KNN, and document structure hierarchies to construct document graphs and extract subgraphs for
answering questions. MoGG [ 44] treats one or two sentences as the smallest semantic units, using these as
nodes and building edges based on semantic similarity between nodes. It also trains a predictor to determine
the textual granularity required for answering a query by deciding how large a sub-graph is needed. To capture
more high-level semantic relationships between text blocks, RAPTOR [ 43], employs clustering algorithms
to hierarchically cluster the finest granularity of text blocks. It summarizes new semantic information at
each hierarchical level, recalling the most necessary information within a collapsed tree of nodes. Similarly,
GraphRAG [ 104], adopts a clustering approach. It initially connects the smallest text blocks based on semantic
similarity, then uses community detection algorithms to group nodes. Finally, it summarizes the global answer
to a query by analyzing responses within each node community.
4.5 Natural Language to SQL Queries
When dealing with structured data, converting natural language queries to SQL (NL2SQL) can be an effective approach.
Tools like Chat2DB facilitate this process by translating user queries into database queries. In the era of large language
models, there has been significant progress in the area of text-to-SQL[ 105,106,107,108], which allows us to utilize
these tools to retrieve information from structured databases. This capability serves as a valuable external data source to
augment the generation capabilities of LLMs. By integrating text-to-SQL tools [ 109], LLMs can access and incorporate
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
structured data, enhancing their ability to generate more accurate and contextually relevant responses. This integration
not only improves the depth and quality of the generated content but also expands the scope of LLM applications,
enabling them to perform more complex tasks that require interaction with and interpretation of database content.
4.6 Discussion on Fact Queries
Whether to Use Fine-tuning . Some works [ 110] have demonstrated the hardness of LLMs to acquire new factual
knowledge during fine tuning. This process can lead to a deterioration in the overall performance of the LLMs in
generating accurate responses, and it often results in the generation of more hallucinations. Furthermore, study [ 111]
suggests that fine-tuning LLMs with new factual data may cause the models to mechanically memorize fact statements.
Interestingly, altering the phrasing of these memorized facts can render the recently learned knowledge ineffective,
indicating a superficial level of understanding and retention by the LLMs. This points to limitations in the current
fine-tuning processes and the need for more sophisticated methods to integrate and adapt new information effectively.
Whether to Separate Different Levels of Fact Queries . Both explicit fact queriesand implicit fact queriesare fact-based,
and it is crucial to determine which level these queries belong before constructing data augmented LLM applications.
Misclassifying explicit fact queriesas implicit fact queriescan lead to the retrieval of an abundance of superficial
information that is seemingly relevant but ultimately unhelpful for answering the question, which can mislead the LLM
and waste computational resources. Conversely, mistaking implicit fact queriesfor explicit fact queriescan prevent
the use of appropriate methods to retrieve a sufficient and comprehensive set of external auxiliary data. Implicit fact
queries often require dynamically integrating information specific to the context of the queries, whereas explicit fact
queriesgenerally need only a single data snippet, leading to the retrieval of a fixed amount of external data. This can
result in suboptimal performance of the LLM. Therefore, it is advantageous to preliminarily distinguish the level of
queries based on a thorough understanding of the target task. Additionally, considerable effort has been directed towards
training models to autonomously assess whether the information retrieved is sufficient, exemplified by approaches such
as self-RAG [92].
5 Interpretable Rationale Queries (L3)
5.1 Overview
In this section and the next, we will explore queries that necessitate external data to furnish rationales for their resolution.
These queries demand not only a grasp of the factual content but also the ability to comprehend and apply domain-
specific rationales that are integral to the data’s context. We classify these queries into two categories based on the
nature of the rationales involved: queries based on interpretable rationales and those based on hidden rationales, as
illustrated in the Figure 4.
Interpretable rationale queries represent a relatively straightforward category within applications that rely on external
data to provide rationales. The auxiliary data for these types of queries often include clear explanations of the thought
processes used to solve problems. The data can be organized in several forms:
•Plain Texts : Textual descriptions are the most common form of presenting interpretable rationales. These may
include specialized or official documents such as handbooks or guidelines, as well as domain-specific manuals
or operational guides. These texts articulate the reasoning processes that facilitate decision-making in complex
scenarios. For example, documents such as FDA Guidance for pharmaceutical factories or medication guides
for physicians provide insights into how experts, like FDA officers or doctors, approach specific cases.
•Structured Instructions : More explicit reasoning relationships or decision pathways might be presented in
a structured format. These rationales can be understood as either a Text-Conditioned Moore Machine or a
Text-Conditioned Mealy Machine. In the theory of computation, a Moore machine is a finite-state machine
where the output values are determined solely by its current state4. The conditions that control state transitions
are often expressed in text, which LLMs need to interpret, unlike traditional programs that operate on native
code. For instance, consider a customer supporting agent that follows a handbook to handle user’s request to
product changing or refunding. Similarly, a Mealy machine is a finite-state machine where output values are
determined by both its current state and the inputs5. The distinction here is that actions (such as API calls) are
determined not only by the state but also by the textual messages associated with transitions from the previous
state. Naturally, these domain-specific rationales can be represented in formats such as workflows, decision
trees, or pseudocode.
4https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moore_machine
5https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mealy_machine
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
Figure 4: Demonstration of Rationale Queries
Here are some examples of queries at this level:
•How should a patient with chest pain and specific symptom descriptions be diagnosed and treated (given a
chest pain management guideline)
•How to respond to a user’s question in a real-life scenario? (given a customer service workflow)
5.2 Challenges and Solutions
In the realm of interpretable rationale queries, an additional challenge is integrating domain-specific rationales into
LLMs in an comprehensible manner. The primary challenges are as follows:
•Prompt Optimization Costs : The process of optimizing prompts is marked by high time and computational
demands. Distinct queries demand tailored background knowledge and decision-making criteria, necessitating
diverse examples. While manually designed prompts can be highly effective, they are labor-intensive and time-
consuming. Furthermore, training models to generate tailored prompts for various queries incurs significant
computational overhead.
•Limited interpretability : The impact of prompts on LLMs is opaque. In many cases, access to the internal
parameters of LLMs is typically restricted, complicating efforts to determine the impact of various prompts
on these models. This lack of transparency hinders our ability to consistently understand and verify the
interpretability of LLM responses to different prompts.
5.3 Prompt Tuning
For interpretable rationale queries, the key issue is how to effectively integrate rationales provided by external data into
LLMs and ensure that these models can accurately follow and react based on these rationales. Text2MDT [ 112] offers
a viable demonstration, introducing two methods for automatically extracting medical decision trees from medical
guidelines and textbooks. This process clarifies the logical chains within lengthy medical texts, making them more
comprehensible. Similarly, MedDM [ 113] has developed a format for clinical guidance trees that can be executed by
LLMs, proposing a methodology for reasoning on these executable CGTs and a framework for multi-turn dialogues
between patients and LLMs. InstructRec [ 114] aims to leverage the capabilities of LLMs in recommendation systems,
designing a universal format to describe a user’s preferences, intentions, task forms, and context using natural language,
thereby creating a high-performing, language-based recommendation system.
Integrating rationales directly as natural language instructions into LLMs does not necessarily yield optimal performance,
and manually designing prompts can be time-consuming. To address this, the employment of prompt tuning techniques
becomes essential to enhance the LLMs’ capability to adhere to specific rationales. One effective methodology is
the application of reinforcement learning, as evidenced by the TEMPERA framework [ 115], which designs prompts
incorporating limited instructions, examples, and verbalizers within the action space of reinforcement learning. Here,
the LLM’s probability of generating correct responses serves as the reward, guiding the model to discover the optimal
prompt configuration across datasets. Similarly, Rlprompt [ 116] adopts a reinforcement learning approach, training an
adaptor to assist smaller language models in producing optimal prompts based on feedback concerning the relative
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
accuracy of LLM responses. Another innovative strategy, Directional Stimulus Prompting, leverages the performance
of LLMs on downstream tasks as a reward mechanism. This method trains models to extract and utilize directional
stimuli—specific cues or keywords tailored to individual instances—as prompts, thereby ensuring the LLMs’ actions
align more closely with expected outcomes.
Additionally, for optimization within discrete prompt spaces, edit-based methodologies such as GrIPS [ 117] are
utilized. This technique involves using a small dataset as a scoring set to experiment with various prompt modifica-
tions—including deletions, swaps, paraphrases, and additions—to ascertain the most effective prompt configurations
swiftly and effectively.
Recent advancements [ 118,119] have also seen the rise of using LLMs themselves to facilitate prompt optimization.
OPRO [ 120] employs an LLM both to generate new prompt solutions based on historical data and their associated
performance metrics and to score these prompts, thus streamlining the optimization process. Furthermore, the Reflexion
framework [ 121] introduces a novel prompt optimization approach based on linguistic feedback, using a language
model to analyze and store reflections on LLM outputs in an episodic memory buffer. This memory component aids in
refining decision-making processes and evaluating outcomes in future interactions, leveraging accumulated historical
insights.
5.4 CoT Prompting
Addressing complex rationales necessitates that LLMs engage in extended chains of reasoning, a process distinct
from the reasoning across disparate factual information typical of fact queries. However, Chain-of-Thoughts [ 122],
Tree-of-Thoughts [ 123] or Graph-of-Thoughts [ 124] methodologies proves effective for such scenarios. For issues that
are well-studied and have high general applicability, manually designing CoT prompts emerges as a feasible solution. Ji
et al. (2023) [ 125] proposed a method of self-reflection that integrates knowledge acquisition with answer generation.
By utilizing external tools and designing prompts, they constructed three types of self-reflection loops: the Factual
Knowledge Acquiring Loop, the Knowledge-Consistent Answering Loop, and the Question-Entailment Answering
Loop, thereby incorporating external rationales into the model’s processing. Furthermore, Wu et al. (2024) [ 126]
conducted a manual analysis of error types in clinical records and developed three distinct CoT prompts to direct the
GPT-4 model [ 127] in focusing on intervention, diagnostic, and management errors. This targeted prompting facilitates
the tasks of automatic error detection, span identification, and correction within clinical records.
While manual design of CoT prompts is highly effective, it requires substantial human and temporal resources. To
mitigate these costs, Automate-CoT [ 128] proposed a technique for generating augmenting rational chains from a
minimally labeled dataset. This approach employs a variance-reduced policy gradient strategy to evaluate the importance
of each CoT chain, thus facilitating the selection of the most effective prompt combination.
Another form of utilizing Chain of Thoughts prompting involves constructing an agent workflow centered around
LLMs. This typically requires the development of a more comprehensive system to address various real-world
scenarios. According to Wang et al., such systems can be broadly divided into profiling, memory, planning, and
action modules [ 129]. Interpretable rationales can be integrated into multiple modules in various forms, allowing the
agent to adapt and iterate based on environmental or human feedback. Recent advancements, such as those by LLM
Reasoners [ 130] and SocREval [ 131], have focused on automatically evaluating the quality of reasoning chains. These
methodologies also assist in constructing robust data augmented LLM applications.
Applications based on interpretable rationales span various domains. For instance, CoML [ 132] integrates AutoML
knowledge as prompts into an LLM, dynamically retrieves useful information from historical experimental records, and
combines these elements to empower the LLM to develop machine learning solutions for novel tasks. MetaGPT [ 133]
has developed a multi-agent system for software development, where different stakeholders within a project are each
represented as an agent. This setup enables multiple agents to collaborate according to a real-world work pipeline,
effectively completing software development tasks. Similarly, sophisticated agent systems have been designed in fields
such as customer service [134] and medical question answering [135]. In these domains, agents are tailored to handle
specific types of inquiries, which can involve understanding complex user requests or providing accurate medical
information. These systems not only enhance the interaction quality but also improve the efficiency and accuracy of
responses, demonstrating the versatility and potential of LLMs when integrated into well-designed agent workflows.
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
6 Hidden Rationale Queries (L4)
6.1 Overview
Hidden rationale queries are the most challenging type of queries to address. Unlike interpretable rationale queries,
which provide clear guidance on the rationales needed to respond to queries, hidden rationale queriesinvolve domain-
specific reasoning method that may not be explicitly described and are too numerous to exhaust. These rationales
often encompass a wide variety that cannot be fully explored within the typical context window and may lack clear
instructions, representing a form of domain expertise that is implicit within the data. Such data might include, but is not
limited to:
•In-domain Data : Hidden rationale queries might utilize data from the same domain, such as historical
question-and-answer records or artificially generated data. This in-domain data inherently contains the
reasoning skills or methodologies necessary to address current queries. For instance, in the context of Python
programming puzzles, solutions to historical problems often include classical algorithms and problem-solving
strategies that could aid in resolving current issues.
•Preliminary Knowledge : Another form of hidden rationales consists of extensive, dispersed knowledge
bases that vary in application across different scenarios. This preliminary knowledge may constitute a
comprehensive axiomatic system, such as all local legal codes that form the basis for legal judgments. It could
also include proven intermediate conclusions that simplify reasoning processes in fields like mathematical
proofs. When addressing real-world issues using external data, this prior knowledge might also stem from
complex accumulations of human experiences and empirical summaries.
Navigating hidden rationale queriesthus demands sophisticated analytical techniques to decode and leverage the latent
wisdom embedded within disparate data sources, presenting significant challenges for RAG systems in effectively
interpreting and applying such intricate and implicit information.
Here are some examples of queries at this level:
•How will the economic situation affect the company’s future development? (given a collection of financial
reports, with economic and financial rationale required)
•How to achieve 24 points using the numbers 5, 5, 5, and 1? (given a series of 24-point game examples and
corresponding answers.)
•Does Afghanistan permit a parent to confer his or her citizenship on a child born abroad? (given the
GLOBALCIT citizenship law dataset [136])
6.2 Challenges and Solutions
The construction of data-augmented LLM applications is significantly challenged by hidden rationale queries, with
primary difficulties manifesting in the following areas:
•Logical retrieval : For questions involving hidden rationales, the helpfulness of external data does not simply
depend on entity-level or semantic similarity, but rather on logical congruence or thematic alignment. Standard
retrieval methods often struggle to capture the true target of the query or to identify text segments with logical
similarities based on the problem presented. This necessitates the development of more sophisticated retrieval
algorithms that can parse and identify underlying logical structures rather than relying solely on superficial
textual similarities.
•Data insufficiency : Fundamentally, external data may not explicitly contain the guidance or answers relevant
to the current query. Instead, relevant information is often embedded in dispersed knowledges or illustrated
through examples. This indirect presentation demands robust capabilities in data interpretation and synthesis,
requiring LLMs to effectively derive coherent answers from fragmented or tangentially related data sources.
Such challenges underscore the imperative for sophisticated data integration and reasoning capabilities within
LLM frameworks to navigate the complexities of hidden rationale querieseffectively.
6.3 Offline Learning
To address these types of queries, a common approach is to identify and extract rules and guidelines from datasets
offline, subsequently retrieving related items. For generate reasoning rationales, some work like STaR [ 137] and
LXS [ 138] used LLM for rationale generation. The former employs an iterative few-shot example method to generate
14

--- PAGE 15 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
from small dataset to large dataset, the later introduced a two-role explaining extraction process where a learner model
generated explanations and a critic model assess them for validation.
GL [ 139] identifies errors and generalizes them into guidelines for future tasks through an in-context-learning.
LEAP [ 140] forms principles by generating mistakes, low-level principles, and high-level principles, incorporat-
ing these principles into prompts for final inference. RICP [ 141] uses mistakes from training data to generate high-level
reasoning and specific insights, then employs hierarchical clustering to group modes of errors, generating task-level and
question-level principles, which are combined and retrieved for question-level insights. A Buffer-of-Thought [ 142] uses
a problem distiller to distill a meta-buffer across many reasoning tasks.
Some integrated methods, like MedPrompt [ 143], include GPT-4-generated chains of thought for training examples with
self-validation, using these in conjunction with a KNN retrieval in-context learning approach. Agent Hospital [ 144]
generates rationales through reflection and utilizes both record retrieval and experience retrieval on generated data.
Although these concepts go by many different names—such as guidelines, principles, experiences, and thought
templates—the main idea is to extract common useful rationales to enhance reasoning queries. These rationales may
come from self-generated chains of thought (MedPrompt, Buffer-of-Thought), training set mistakes (GL, RICP, Agent
Hospital), or intentionally generated mistakes (LEAP). Additionally, some principles are used across all tasks (Agent
Hospital, RICP), while others are dynamically retrieved for specific questions (MedPrompt, Buffer-of-Thought). Many
of these works demonstrate that learning from cases to accumulate experience as rationales is beneficial for various
reasoning tasks.
6.4 In Context Learning (ICL)
Using examples for in-context learning is a common method for uncovering hidden rationales. Pre-trained large
language models exhibit substantial in-context learning capabilities, which can be enhanced by retrieving examples
based on similarity, thereby leveraging the models’ few-shot learning abilities [ 145,146]. However, the inclusion of
irrelevant information in prompts can easily distract LLMs, leading to incorrect responses [ 147,148]. OpenICL, as
developed by Wu et al. [ 149], constructed an ICL framework that explores the impact of different traditional methods of
retrieving examples and inference techniques on ICL effectiveness.
Furthermore, training smaller models based on the feedback from LLMs regarding context examples to select optimal
demonstrations and examples can improve the construction of context for specific tasks in a more targeted manner [ 150,
5,151]. To address the issue that semantic similarity-based example retrieval may not cover the broader range of
associations needed in practical tests, Su et al.[ 152] employed an unsupervised, graph-based selective annotation method
called vote-k, constructing a more diverse and representative example database for few-shot learning. Additionally,
Zhang et al.[ 153] proposed an Auto-CoT method that clusters examples into various representative types. By sampling
problems diversely and generating reasoning chains, this method constructs examples that better support the learning
process.
However, enabling LLMs to master reasoning capabilities outside their trained domains through few-shot learning
remains a substantial challenge. Wang et al. addressed this by sampling a variety of reasoning paths and marginalizing
over these paths to select the most consistent answer, thereby enhancing the probability of LLMs selecting correct
reasoning chains [ 154]. Agarwal et al. introduced two scalable methods for generating usable example, namely
reinforced ICL and unsupervised ICL, that aim to replace human-generated examples, thus expanding the pool of
available examples [ 155]. DIN-SQL [ 156] sought to decompose tasks into simpler subtasks and used the solutions
to these sub-problems as prompts for LLMs, significantly improving their performance in generating SQL from text.
Similarly, DUP [ 157] identified three main issues LLMs face when using the chain of thought approach to solve
complex mathematical word problems: semantic misunderstandings, computational errors, and missing steps, with
semantic misunderstandings being a primary limiting factor. Encouraging LLMs to deeply understand the problems and
extract essential information for resolution can significantly enhance their ability to solve mathematical problems by
addressing these semantic misunderstandings.
In-context learning is increasingly being utilized across various fields such as mathematics, law, medicine, and
finance [ 158,159,160], playing a crucial role in the development of data-augmented LLM applications. This approach
not only extends the functional capabilities of LLMs but also enhances their practical utility across diverse domains.
6.5 Fine-tuning
Despite the robust in-context learning capabilities of LLMs, accurately identifying rationales or optimal examples for
complex and lengthy logical chains remains a significant challenge. Additionally, the provision of extensive external
prior knowledge can also pose challenges to the inference capabilities of LLMs. Given these factors, fine-tuning
15

--- PAGE 16 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
Figure 5: Summary of Main Techniques for Different Query Levels in Data augmented LLM applications
emerges as a promising approach. It not only utilizes the extensive foundational knowledge that LLMs acquire during
pretraining but also enables them to rapidly grasp new domain rationales. This method provides a viable path for
enhancing the adaptability and effectiveness of LLMs in tackling advanced and specialized tasks.
Instruction tuning is a common method for infusing new capabilities into LLMs, typically involving supervised fine-
tuning using paired (instruction, output) data. There are three primary methods for constructing an instruction dataset:
a) deriving from existing datasets [ 161,162], b) manually creating through handcrafted instructions [ 163,164,165],
and c) generating synthetic data using powerful LLMs [ 166,154]. Additionally, numerous studies [ 167,168,169] have
explored how to optimize the data distribution within instruction datasets to enhance fine-tuning effectiveness. However,
when building data-augmented LLM applications, fine-tuning remains a relatively costly method in terms of time and
computational resources. Recently, several efforts have been made to reduce the costs associated with fine-tuning
large models. Adapter tuning, for instance, involves integrating small adapter models with LLMs while freezing the
parameters of the LLM during fine-tuning and only optimizing the weights of the adapter [ 170,171,172,173]. Prefix
Tuning and Prompt Tuning involve adding a set of trainable vectors before the input, which are optimized during training
to enhance the performance of the LLM [ 174,175,176,177,178]. Low-Rank Adaptation [ 179,180,181,182,183]
reduces the number of trainable parameters needed for adapting to downstream tasks by imposing low-rank constraints
on each dense layer to approximate the update matrices.
In recent years, there has been a substantial amount of work using supervised fine-tuning to enhance the capabilities
of LLMs in specialized domains such as mathematical reasoning, finance, law, and healthcare [ 184,185,186]. For
instance, ChatTimeLlama [ 187] introduced an interpretable time reasoning instruction tuning dataset and fine-tuned on
LLaMA [ 188] to significantly improve the model’s complex temporal reasoning, future event prediction capabilities,
and interpretability. LISA [ 189] leveraged a small set of segment data samples that involve reasoning to fine-tune
the multimodal LLM LLaV A, which resulted in substantial improvements in reasoning segmentation capabilities.
MAmmoTH [ 190] ingeniously constructed a mathematical example dataset that uniquely combines Chain of Thought
and Program of Thought reasoning, ensuring broad coverage across different mathematical domains and enhancing
the LLM’s ability to solve general mathematical problems. ReFT [191] proposes a method for learning from multiple
annotated reasoning paths corresponding to the same problem. It automatically samples numerous reasoning trajectories
for a given mathematical problem, leveraging the correct answer to generate reward signals. ChatDoctor [ 192]
utilized a large dataset of 100,000 patient-doctor dialogues from a widely-used online medical consultation platform
to fine-tune LLaMA, significantly enhancing the model’s ability to understand patient needs and provide effective
recommendations. FinGPT [ 193] developed an open-source LLM fine-tuned on financial data using automated data
curation and lightweight, low-rank adaptation techniques. DISC-LawLLM [ 194] created a supervised fine-tuning
16

--- PAGE 17 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
Figure 6: Three ways to inject specific domain data into an LLM: a) extracting part of the domain data based on the
query as context input for the LLM, b) training a smaller model with specific domain data, which then guides the
integration of external information subsequently input into the LLM, and c) directly using external domain knowledge
to fine-tune a general large language model to become a domain-expert model.
dataset for the Chinese judicial domain, fine-tuning LLMs to effectively serve a variety of users in different legal
scenarios with enhanced legal reasoning capabilities.
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we delineate data augmented LLM applications into four distinct categories based on the primary focus of
queries, each facing unique challenges and thus requiring tailored solutions, as illustrated in Figure 5. For queries related
to static common knowledge, deploying a general LLM through a Chain of Thought methodology is effective. For
explicit fact queries, the main challenge involves pinpointing the exact location of facts within a database, thus making
a basic RAG the method of choice. In the case of implicit fact queries, which require the collation of multiple related
facts, iterative RAG and RAG implementations on graph or tree structures are preferred for their ability to concurrently
retrieve individual facts and interconnect multiple data points. When extensive data linkage is necessary, text-to-SQL
techniques prove indispensable, leveraging database tools to facilitate external data searches. For interpretable rationale
queries, advancements through prompt tuning and CoT prompting are critical to enhance LLMs’ compliance with
external directives. The most formidable are hidden rationale queries, which demand the autonomous synthesis of
problem-solving approaches from extensive data sets. Here, offline learning, in-context learning , and fine-tuning
emerge as vital methodologies.
Prior to the development of a targeted LLM application, as domain experts, we must acquire an in-depth understanding
of the intended task, ascertain the complexity level of the associated queries, and select corresponding technological
approaches for resolution. These methods principally inject knowledge into LLMs via three mechanisms, as depicted in
Figure 6: a) extracting part of the domain data based on the query as context input for the LLM, b) training a smaller
model with specific domain data, which then guides the integration of external information subsequently input into
the LLM, and c) directly using external domain knowledge to fine-tune a general large language model to become a
domain-expert model. These strategies differ in their requirements for data volume, training duration, and computational
resources, escalating respectively. Knowledge injection through context provides better interpretability and stability but
faces limitations due to the finite context window and potential information loss in the middle [ 40], ideally suited for
scenarios where data can be succinctly explained in shorter texts. However, this method challenges the model’s retrieval
capabilities and knowledge extraction ability. The small model approach offers the advantage of reduced training times
and the capacity to assimilate considerable amounts of data, yet its efficacy is contingent upon the model’s capabilities,
potentially capping the LLM’s performance for more complex tasks and incurring additional training costs with data
increasing. Fine-tuning facilitates the utilization of large model capacities with extensive domain-specific data, yet
its impact on the LLM strongly depends on the design of the data used. Employing out-of-domain factual data for
fine-tuning may inadvertently lead to the generation of more erroneous outputs by the LLM, while also risking the
loss of previously known domain knowledge and the neglect of unencountered tasks during fine-tuning [ 110,195].
17

--- PAGE 18 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
Therefore, choosing an appropriate data injection strategy into the LLM requires a thorough understanding of one’s
data sources and judicious decision-making based on this insight.
Moreover, in practical scenarios, data augmented LLM applicationstypically involves a combination of diverse query
types, necessitating developers to engineer a routing pipeline that integrates multiple methodologies to effectively tackle
these multifaceted challenges.
References
[1]Yuqi Nie, Yaxuan Kong, Xiaowen Dong, John M Mulvey, H Vincent Poor, Qingsong Wen, and Stefan Zohren. A
survey of large language models for financial applications: Progress, prospects and challenges. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.11903 , 2024.
[2]Yining Huang, Keke Tang, and Meilian Chen. A comprehensive survey on evaluating large language model
applications in the medical industry. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.15777 , 2024.
[3]Xiaoxian Yang, Zhifeng Wang, Qi Wang, Ke Wei, Kaiqi Zhang, and Jiangang Shi. Large language models for
automated q&a involving legal documents: a survey on algorithms, frameworks and applications. International
Journal of Web Information Systems , 2024.
[4]Janice Ahn, Rishu Verma, Renze Lou, Di Liu, Rui Zhang, and Wenpeng Yin. Large language models for
mathematical reasoning: Progresses and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00157 , 2024.
[5]Xinyi Wang, Wanrong Zhu, Michael Saxon, Mark Steyvers, and William Yang Wang. Large language models
are latent variable models: Explaining and finding good demonstrations for in-context learning. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024.
[6]Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai, Jiawei Sun, Meng Wang, and
Haofen Wang. Retrieval-augmented generation for large language models: A survey, 2023.
[7]Penghao Zhao, Hailin Zhang, Qinhan Yu, Zhengren Wang, Yunteng Geng, Fangcheng Fu, Ling Yang, Wentao
Zhang, Jie Jiang, and Bin Cui. Retrieval-augmented generation for ai-generated content: A survey, 2024.
[8]Yujuan Ding, Wenqi Fan, Liangbo Ning, Shijie Wang, Hengyun Li, Dawei Yin, Tat-Seng Chua, and Qing Li. A
survey on rag meets llms: Towards retrieval-augmented large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.06211 ,
2024.
[9]Xiaoxi Li, Jiajie Jin, Yujia Zhou, Yuyao Zhang, Peitian Zhang, Yutao Zhu, and Zhicheng Dou. From matching to
generation: A survey on generative information retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14851 , 2024.
[10] Penghao Zhao, Hailin Zhang, Qinhan Yu, Zhengren Wang, Yunteng Geng, Fangcheng Fu, Ling Yang, Wentao
Zhang, and Bin Cui. Retrieval-augmented generation for ai-generated content: A survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.19473 , 2024.
[11] Zeyu Han, Chao Gao, Jinyang Liu, Sai Qian Zhang, et al. Parameter-efficient fine-tuning for large models: A
comprehensive survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.14608 , 2024.
[12] Hongling Zheng, Li Shen, Anke Tang, Yong Luo, Han Hu, Bo Du, and Dacheng Tao. Learn from model beyond
fine-tuning: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08184 , 2023.
[13] Shengyu Zhang, Linfeng Dong, Xiaoya Li, Sen Zhang, Xiaofei Sun, Shuhe Wang, Jiwei Li, Runyi Hu, Tianwei
Zhang, Fei Wu, et al. Instruction tuning for large language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10792 ,
2023.
[14] J Gruettner, T Henzler, T Sueselbeck, C Fink, M Borggrefe, and T Walter. Clinical assessment of chest pain and
guidelines for imaging. European Journal of Radiology , 81(12):3663–3668, 2012.
[15] Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redfield, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris Alberti, Danielle
Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, et al. Natural questions: a benchmark for question answering
research. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 7:453–466, 2019.
[16] Payal Bajaj, Daniel Campos, Nick Craswell, Li Deng, Jianfeng Gao, Xiaodong Liu, Rangan Majumder, Andrew
McNamara, Bhaskar Mitra, Tri Nguyen, et al. Ms marco: A human generated machine reading comprehension
dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.09268 , 2016.
[17] Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. triviaqa: A Large Scale Distantly Supervised
Challenge Dataset for Reading Comprehension. arXiv e-prints , page arXiv:1705.03551, 2017.
[18] Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. Squad: 100,000+ questions for machine
comprehension of text. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05250 , 2016.
18

--- PAGE 19 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
[19] Ivan Stelmakh, Yi Luan, Bhuwan Dhingra, and Ming-Wei Chang. Asqa: Factoid questions meet long-form
answers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06092 , 2022.
[20] Wen-tau Yih, Matthew Richardson, Chris Meek, Ming-Wei Chang, and Jina Suh. The value of semantic parse
labeling for knowledge base question answering. In Katrin Erk and Noah A. Smith, editors, Proceedings of the
54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 201–206,
Berlin, Germany, August 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[21] Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Christo-
pher D Manning. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question answering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1809.09600 , 2018.
[22] Xanh Ho, Anh-Khoa Duong Nguyen, Saku Sugawara, and Akiko Aizawa. Constructing a multi-hop qa dataset
for comprehensive evaluation of reasoning steps. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.01060 , 2020.
[23] Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Musique: Multihop questions
via single-hop question composition. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 10:539–554,
2022.
[24] Ofir Press, Muru Zhang, Sewon Min, Ludwig Schmidt, Noah A Smith, and Mike Lewis. Measuring and
narrowing the compositionality gap in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03350 , 2022.
[25] Mor Geva, Daniel Khashabi, Elad Segal, Tushar Khot, Dan Roth, and Jonathan Berant. Did aristotle use a
laptop? a question answering benchmark with implicit reasoning strategies. Transactions of the Association for
Computational Linguistics , 9:346–361, 2021.
[26] Alon Talmor and Jonathan Berant. The web as a knowledge-base for answering complex questions. In Marilyn
Walker, Heng Ji, and Amanda Stent, editors, Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers) ,
pages 641–651, New Orleans, Louisiana, June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[27] Jonathan Berant, Andrew Chou, Roy Frostig, and Percy Liang. Semantic parsing on freebase from question-
answer pairs. In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing , pages
1533–1544, 2013.
[28] Priyanka Sen, Alham Fikri Aji, and Amir Saffari. Mintaka: A complex, natural, and multilingual dataset for
end-to-end question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.01613 , 2022.
[29] Yuyu Zhang, Hanjun Dai, Zornitsa Kozareva, Alexander J Smola, and Le Song. Variational reasoning for
question answering with knowledge graph. In AAAI , 2018.
[30] Pradeep Dasigi, Kyle Lo, Iz Beltagy, Arman Cohan, Noah A. Smith, and Matt Gardner. A dataset of information-
seeking questions and answers anchored in research papers. 2021.
[31] Dheeru Dua, Yizhong Wang, Pradeep Dasigi, Gabriel Stanovsky, Sameer Singh, and Matt Gardner. Drop: A read-
ing comprehension benchmark requiring discrete reasoning over paragraphs. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.00161 ,
2019.
[32] Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Alicia Parrish, Nitish Joshi, Nikita Nangia, Jason Phang, Angelica Chen, Vishakh
Padmakumar, Johnny Ma, Jana Thompson, He He, et al. Quality: Question answering with long input texts, yes!
arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08608 , 2021.
[33] Rami Aly, Zhijiang Guo, Michael Schlichtkrull, James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos Christodoulopoulos,
Oana Cocarascu, and Arpit Mittal. Feverous: Fact extraction and verification over unstructured and structured
information. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.05707 , 2021.
[34] Dehai Min, Nan Hu, Rihui Jin, Nuo Lin, Jiaoyan Chen, Yongrui Chen, Yu Li, Guilin Qi, Yun Li, Nijun Li, and
Qianren Wang. Exploring the impact of table-to-text methods on augmenting llm-based question answering with
domain hybrid data, 2024.
[35] Dídac Surís, Sachit Menon, and Carl V ondrick. Vipergpt: Visual inference via python execution for reasoning.
InProceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pages 11888–11898, 2023.
[36] Difei Gao, Lei Ji, Luowei Zhou, Kevin Qinghong Lin, Joya Chen, Zihan Fan, and Mike Zheng Shou. Assistgpt:
A general multi-modal assistant that can plan, execute, inspect, and learn. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08640 ,
2023.
[37] Ziniu Hu, Ahmet Iscen, Chen Sun, Zirui Wang, Kai-Wei Chang, Yizhou Sun, Cordelia Schmid, David A Ross,
and Alireza Fathi. Reveal: Retrieval-augmented visual-language pre-training with multi-source multimodal
knowledge memory. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,
pages 23369–23379, 2023.
19

--- PAGE 20 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
[38] Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi. Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training for
unified vision-language understanding and generation. In International conference on machine learning , pages
12888–12900. PMLR, 2022.
[39] Xinwei Long, Jiali Zeng, Fandong Meng, Zhiyuan Ma, Kaiyan Zhang, Bowen Zhou, and Jie Zhou. Generative
multi-modal knowledge retrieval with large language models. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, pages 18733–18741, 2024.
[40] Nelson F Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paranjape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy Liang.
Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts. Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , 12:157–173, 2024.
[41] LangChain. Text splitter. https://python.langchain.com/v0.1/docs/modules/data_connection/
document_transformers/ , 2023.
[42] LlamaIndex. Semantic splitter. https://docs.llamaindex.ai/en/stable/api_reference/node_
parsers/semantic_splitter/ , 2023.
[43] Parth Sarthi, Salman Abdullah, Aditi Tuli, Shubh Khanna, Anna Goldie, and Christopher D Manning. Raptor:
Recursive abstractive processing for tree-organized retrieval. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.18059 , 2024.
[44] Zijie Zhong, Hanwen Liu, Xiaoya Cui, Xiaofan Zhang, and Zengchang Qin. Mix-of-granularity: Optimize the
chunking granularity for retrieval-augmented generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00456 , 2024.
[45] Tong Chen, Hongwei Wang, Sihao Chen, Wenhao Yu, Kaixin Ma, Xinran Zhao, Dong Yu, and Hongming Zhang.
Dense x retrieval: What retrieval granularity should we use? arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06648 , 2023.
[46] Antonio Jimeno Yepes, Yao You, Jan Milczek, Sebastian Laverde, and Leah Li. Financial report chunking for
effective retrieval augmented generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05131 , 2024.
[47] Karen Sparck Jones. A statistical interpretation of term specificity and its application in retrieval. Journal of
documentation , 28(1):11–21, 1972.
[48] Stephen E Robertson, Steve Walker, Susan Jones, Micheline M Hancock-Beaulieu, Mike Gatford, et al. Okapi at
trec-3. Nist Special Publication Sp , 109:109, 1995.
[49] Ori Ram, Yoav Levine, Itay Dalmedigos, Dor Muhlgay, Amnon Shashua, Kevin Leyton-Brown, and Yoav
Shoham. In-context retrieval-augmented language models. Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , 11:1316–1331, 2023.
[50] Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F Xu, Luyu Gao, Zhiqing Sun, Qian Liu, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan,
and Graham Neubig. Active retrieval augmented generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06983 , 2023.
[51] Fangyuan Xu, Weijia Shi, and Eunsol Choi. Recomp: Improving retrieval-augmented lms with context com-
pression and selective augmentation. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations ,
2024.
[52] Leonid Boytsov, David Novak, Yury Malkov, and Eric Nyberg. Off the beaten path: Let’s replace term-based
retrieval with k-nn search. In Proceedings of the 25th ACM international on conference on information and
knowledge management , pages 1099–1108, 2016.
[53] Shengyao Zhuang and Guido Zuccon. Tilde: Term independent likelihood model for passage re-ranking. In
Proceedings of the 44th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval , pages 1483–1492, 2021.
[54] Shengyao Zhuang and Guido Zuccon. Fast passage re-ranking with contextualized exact term matching and
efficient passage expansion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.08513 , 2021.
[55] Jacob Devlin. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805 , 2018.
[56] Vladimir Karpukhin, Barlas O ˘guz, Sewon Min, Patrick Lewis, Ledell Wu, Sergey Edunov, Danqi Chen, and
Wen-tau Yih. Dense passage retrieval for open-domain question answering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.04906 ,
2020.
[57] Lee Xiong, Chenyan Xiong, Ye Li, Kwok-Fung Tang, Jialin Liu, Paul Bennett, Junaid Ahmed, and Arnold
Overwijk. Approximate nearest neighbor negative contrastive learning for dense text retrieval. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2007.00808 , 2020.
[58] Tianyu Gao, Xingcheng Yao, and Danqi Chen. Simcse: Simple contrastive learning of sentence embeddings.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08821 , 2021.
20

--- PAGE 21 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
[59] Sebastian Hofstätter, Sheng-Chieh Lin, Jheng-Hong Yang, Jimmy Lin, and Allan Hanbury. Efficiently teaching
an effective dense retriever with balanced topic aware sampling. In Proceedings of the 44th International ACM
SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pages 113–122, 2021.
[60] Gautier Izacard, Mathilde Caron, Lucas Hosseini, Sebastian Riedel, Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin,
and Edouard Grave. Unsupervised dense information retrieval with contrastive learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.09118 , 2021.
[61] Peitian Zhang, Shitao Xiao, Zheng Liu, Zhicheng Dou, and Jian-Yun Nie. Retrieve anything to augment large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07554 , 2023.
[62] Xueguang Ma, Liang Wang, Nan Yang, Furu Wei, and Jimmy Lin. Fine-tuning llama for multi-stage text retrieval.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08319 , 2023.
[63] Sebastian Borgeaud, Arthur Mensch, Jordan Hoffmann, Trevor Cai, Eliza Rutherford, Katie Millican, George Bm
Van Den Driessche, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Bogdan Damoc, Aidan Clark, et al. Improving language models by
retrieving from trillions of tokens. In International conference on machine learning , pages 2206–2240. PMLR,
2022.
[64] Jianmo Ni, Chen Qu, Jing Lu, Zhuyun Dai, Gustavo Hernández Ábrego, Ji Ma, Vincent Y Zhao, Yi Luan, Keith B
Hall, Ming-Wei Chang, et al. Large dual encoders are generalizable retrievers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.07899 ,
2021.
[65] Parishad BehnamGhader, Vaibhav Adlakha, Marius Mosbach, Dzmitry Bahdanau, Nicolas Chapados, and Siva
Reddy. Llm2vec: Large language models are secretly powerful text encoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05961 ,
2024.
[66] Chaofan Li, Zheng Liu, Shitao Xiao, Yingxia Shao, and Defu Lian. Llama2vec: Unsupervised adaptation of
large language models for dense retrieval. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3490–3500, 2024.
[67] Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov,
Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288 , 2023.
[68] Shangbin Feng, Weijia Shi, Yuyang Bai, Vidhisha Balachandran, Tianxing He, and Yulia Tsvetkov. Knowledge
card: Filling llms’ knowledge gaps with plug-in specialized language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09955 ,
2023.
[69] Kunal Sawarkar, Abhilasha Mangal, and Shivam Raj Solanki. Blended rag: Improving rag (retriever-augmented
generation) accuracy with semantic search and hybrid query-based retrievers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.07220 ,
2024.
[70] Jianlv Chen, Shitao Xiao, Peitian Zhang, Kun Luo, Defu Lian, and Zheng Liu. Bge m3-embedding: Multi-
lingual, multi-functionality, multi-granularity text embeddings through self-knowledge distillation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.03216 , 2024.
[71] Yi Luan, Jacob Eisenstein, Kristina Toutanova, and Michael Collins. Sparse, dense, and attentional representations
for text retrieval. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , 9:329–345, 2021.
[72] Qiaoyu Tang, Jiawei Chen, Bowen Yu, Yaojie Lu, Cheng Fu, Haiyang Yu, Hongyu Lin, Fei Huang, Ben He,
Xianpei Han, et al. Self-retrieval: Building an information retrieval system with one large language model. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.00801 , 2024.
[73] Xin Cheng, Di Luo, Xiuying Chen, Lemao Liu, Dongyan Zhao, and Rui Yan. Lift yourself up: Retrieval-
augmented text generation with self-memory. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024.
[74] Xinbei Ma, Yeyun Gong, Pengcheng He, Hai Zhao, and Nan Duan. Query rewriting for retrieval-augmented
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14283 , 2023.
[75] Luyu Gao, Xueguang Ma, Jimmy Lin, and Jamie Callan. Precise zero-shot dense retrieval without relevance
labels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.10496 , 2022.
[76] Vatsal Raina and Mark Gales. Question-based retrieval using atomic units for enterprise rag. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.12363 , 2024.
[77] Jiejun Tan, Zhicheng Dou, Yutao Zhu, Peidong Guo, Kun Fang, and Ji-Rong Wen. Small models, big insights:
Leveraging slim proxy models to decide when and what to retrieve for llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12052 ,
2024.
[78] Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing Yang, and Lili Qiu. Llmlingua: Compressing prompts for
accelerated inference of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05736 , 2023.
21

--- PAGE 22 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
[79] Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Xufang Luo, Dongsheng Li, Chin-Yew Lin, Yuqing Yang, and Lili Qiu. Longllm-
lingua: Accelerating and enhancing llms in long context scenarios via prompt compression. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.06839 , 2023.
[80] Haoyan Yang, Zhitao Li, Yong Zhang, Jianzong Wang, Ning Cheng, Ming Li, and Jing Xiao. Prca: Fitting
black-box large language models for retrieval question answering via pluggable reward-driven contextual adapter.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.18347 , 2023.
[81] Shi-Qi Yan, Jia-Chen Gu, Yun Zhu, and Zhen-Hua Ling. Corrective retrieval augmented generation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.15884 , 2024.
[82] Gangwoo Kim, Sungdong Kim, Byeongguk Jeon, Joonsuk Park, and Jaewoo Kang. Tree of clarifications: An-
swering ambiguous questions with retrieval-augmented large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14696 ,
2023.
[83] Zihua Si, Zhongxiang Sun, Jiale Chen, Guozhang Chen, Xiaoxue Zang, Kai Zheng, Yang Song, Xiao Zhang,
and Jun Xu. Generative retrieval with semantic tree-structured item identifiers via contrastive learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.13375 , 2023.
[84] Kevin Wu, Eric Wu, and James Zou. How faithful are rag models? quantifying the tug-of-war between rag and
llms’ internal prior, 2024.
[85] Hanxing Ding, Liang Pang, Zihao Wei, Huawei Shen, and Xueqi Cheng. Retrieve only when it needs: Adaptive
retrieval augmentation for hallucination mitigation in large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10612 ,
2024.
[86] Hexiang Tan, Fei Sun, Wanli Yang, Yuanzhuo Wang, Qi Cao, and Xueqi Cheng. Blinded by generated
contexts: How language models merge generated and retrieved contexts for open-domain qa? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.11911 , 2024.
[87] Boxin Wang, Wei Ping, Lawrence McAfee, Peng Xu, Bo Li, Mohammad Shoeybi, and Bryan Catanzaro.
Instructretro: Instruction tuning post retrieval-augmented pretraining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07713 , 2023.
[88] Ori Yoran, Tomer Wolfson, Ori Ram, and Jonathan Berant. Making retrieval-augmented language models robust
to irrelevant context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01558 , 2023.
[89] Feiteng Fang, Yuelin Bai, Shiwen Ni, Min Yang, Xiaojun Chen, and Ruifeng Xu. Enhancing noise robustness of
retrieval-augmented language models with adaptive adversarial training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20978 , 2024.
[90] Xi Victoria Lin, Xilun Chen, Mingda Chen, Weijia Shi, Maria Lomeli, Rich James, Pedro Rodriguez, Jacob
Kahn, Gergely Szilvasy, Mike Lewis, et al. Ra-dit: Retrieval-augmented dual instruction tuning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.01352 , 2023.
[91] Sebastian Hofstätter, Jiecao Chen, Karthik Raman, and Hamed Zamani. Fid-light: Efficient and effective
retrieval-augmented text generation. In Proceedings of the 46th International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval , pages 1437–1447, 2023.
[92] Akari Asai, Zeqiu Wu, Yizhong Wang, Avirup Sil, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. Self-rag: Learning to retrieve,
generate, and critique through self-reflection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.11511 , 2023.
[93] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. React:
Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03629 , 2022.
[94] Harsh Trivedi, Niranjan Balasubramanian, Tushar Khot, and Ashish Sabharwal. Interleaving retrieval with chain-
of-thought reasoning for knowledge-intensive multi-step questions. In Anna Rogers, Jordan Boyd-Graber, and
Naoaki Okazaki, editors, Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 10014–10037, Toronto, Canada, July 2023. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[95] Zihao Wang, Anji Liu, Haowei Lin, Jiaqi Li, Xiaojian Ma, and Yitao Liang. Rat: Retrieval augmented thoughts
elicit context-aware reasoning in long-horizon generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05313 , 2024.
[96] Zhengliang Shi, Shuo Zhang, Weiwei Sun, Shen Gao, Pengjie Ren, Zhumin Chen, and Zhaochun Ren.
Generate-then-ground in retrieval-augmented generation for multi-hop question answering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.14891 , 2024.
[97] Zhangyin Feng, Xiaocheng Feng, Dezhi Zhao, Maojin Yang, and Bing Qin. Retrieval-generation synergy
augmented large language models. In ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 11661–11665. IEEE, 2024.
[98] Shirui Pan, Linhao Luo, Yufei Wang, Chen Chen, Jiapu Wang, and Xindong Wu. Unifying large language models
and knowledge graphs: A roadmap. ArXiv , abs/2306.08302, 2023.
22

--- PAGE 23 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
[99] Priyanka Sen, Sandeep Mavadia, and Amir Saffari. Knowledge graph-augmented language models for complex
question answering. In Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Greg Durrett, Peter Jansen, Danilo Neves Ribeiro, and Jason
Wei, editors, Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Natural Language Reasoning and Structured Explanations
(NLRSE) , pages 1–8, Toronto, Canada, June 2023. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[100] Jiashuo Sun, Chengjin Xu, Lumingyuan Tang, Saizhuo Wang, Chen Lin, Yeyun Gong, Lionel M. Ni, Heung-
Yeung Shum, and Jian Guo. Think-on-graph: Deep and responsible reasoning of large language model on
knowledge graph, 2023.
[101] Tiezheng Guo, Qingwen Yang, Chen Wang, Yanyi Liu, Pan Li, Jiawei Tang, Dapeng Li, and Yingyou Wen.
Knowledgenavigator: Leveraging large language models for enhanced reasoning over knowledge graph. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.15880 , 2023.
[102] Armin Toroghi, Willis Guo, Mohammad Mahdi Abdollah Pour, and Scott Sanner. Right for right reasons: Large
language models for verifiable commonsense knowledge graph question answering, 2024.
[103] Yu Wang, Nedim Lipka, Ryan A. Rossi, Alexa F. Siu, Ruiyi Zhang, and Tyler Derr. Knowledge graph prompting
for multi-document question answering. AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence .
[104] Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva Mody, Steven Truitt, and Jonathan
Larson. From local to global: A graph rag approach to query-focused summarization. arXiv.org .
[105] Peng Shi, Rui Zhang, He Bai, and Jimmy Lin. Xricl: Cross-lingual retrieval-augmented in-context learning for
cross-lingual text-to-sql semantic parsing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13693 , 2022.
[106] Haoyang Li, Jing Zhang, Cuiping Li, and Hong Chen. Resdsql: Decoupling schema linking and skeleton parsing
for text-to-sql. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 37, pages 13067–13075,
2023.
[107] Gabriel Poesia, Oleksandr Polozov, Vu Le, Ashish Tiwari, Gustavo Soares, Christopher Meek, and Sumit Gulwani.
Synchromesh: Reliable code generation from pre-trained language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11227 ,
2022.
[108] Xi Victoria Lin, Richard Socher, and Caiming Xiong. Bridging textual and tabular data for cross-domain
text-to-sql semantic parsing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.12627 , 2020.
[109] Asim Biswal, Liana Patel, Siddarth Jha, Amog Kamsetty, Shu Liu, Joseph E Gonzalez, Carlos Guestrin, and
Matei Zaharia. Text2sql is not enough: Unifying ai and databases with tag. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.14717 ,
2024.
[110] Zorik Gekhman, Gal Yona, Roee Aharoni, Matan Eyal, Amir Feder, Roi Reichart, and Jonathan Herzig. Does
fine-tuning llms on new knowledge encourage hallucinations?, 2024.
[111] Lukas Berglund, Meg Tong, Max Kaufmann, Mikita Balesni, Asa Cooper Stickland, Tomasz Korbak, and Owain
Evans. The reversal curse: Llms trained on" a is b" fail to learn" b is a". arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12288 , 2023.
[112] Wei Zhu, Wenfeng Li, Xing Tian, Pengfei Wang, Xiaoling Wang, Jin Chen, Yuanbin Wu, Yuan Ni, and Guotong
Xie. Text2mdt: extracting medical decision trees from medical texts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.02034 , 2024.
[113] Binbin Li, Tianxin Meng, Xiaoming Shi, Jie Zhai, and Tong Ruan. Meddm: Llm-executable clinical guidance
tree for clinical decision-making. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02441 , 2023.
[114] Junjie Zhang, Ruobing Xie, Yupeng Hou, Wayne Xin Zhao, Leyu Lin, and Ji-Rong Wen. Recommendation
as instruction following: A large language model empowered recommendation approach. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.07001 , 2023.
[115] Tianjun Zhang, Xuezhi Wang, Denny Zhou, Dale Schuurmans, and Joseph E Gonzalez. Tempera: Test-time
prompting via reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11890 , 2022.
[116] Mingkai Deng, Jianyu Wang, Cheng-Ping Hsieh, Yihan Wang, Han Guo, Tianmin Shu, Meng Song, Eric P
Xing, and Zhiting Hu. Rlprompt: Optimizing discrete text prompts with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.12548 , 2022.
[117] Archiki Prasad, Peter Hase, Xiang Zhou, and Mohit Bansal. Grips: Gradient-free, edit-based instruction search
for prompting large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07281 , 2022.
[118] Yongchao Zhou, Andrei Ioan Muresanu, Ziwen Han, Keiran Paster, Silviu Pitis, Harris Chan, and Jimmy Ba.
Large language models are human-level prompt engineers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01910 , 2022.
[119] Reid Pryzant, Dan Iter, Jerry Li, Yin Tat Lee, Chenguang Zhu, and Michael Zeng. Automatic prompt optimization
with" gradient descent" and beam search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.03495 , 2023.
23

--- PAGE 24 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
[120] Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun Chen. Large
language models as optimizers. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2024.
[121] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language
agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024.
[122] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou,
et al. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information
processing systems , 35:24824–24837, 2022.
[123] Shunyu Yao, Dian Yu, Jeffrey Zhao, Izhak Shafran, Tom Griffiths, Yuan Cao, and Karthik Narasimhan. Tree of
thoughts: Deliberate problem solving with large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems , 36, 2024.
[124] Yao Yao, Zuchao Li, and Hai Zhao. Beyond chain-of-thought, effective graph-of-thought reasoning in language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16582 , 2023.
[125] Ziwei Ji, Tiezheng Yu, Yan Xu, Nayeon Lee, Etsuko Ishii, and Pascale Fung. Towards mitigating llm hallucination
via self reflection. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages 1827–1843,
2023.
[126] Zhaolong Wu, Abul Hasan, Jinge Wu, Yunsoo Kim, Jason PY Cheung, Teng Zhang, and Honghan Wu. Chain-of-
though (cot) prompting strategies for medical error detection and correction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09103 ,
2024.
[127] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo
Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.08774 , 2023.
[128] KaShun Shum, Shizhe Diao, and Tong Zhang. Automatic prompt augmentation and selection with chain-of-
thought from labeled data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.12822 , 2023.
[129] Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang,
Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, et al. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers of Computer
Science , 18(6):186345, 2024.
[130] Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haotian Luo, Tianyang Liu, Xiyan Shao, Xinyuan Wang, Shuhua Xie, Haodi Ma, Adithya
Samavedhi, Qiyue Gao, et al. Llm reasoners: New evaluation, library, and analysis of step-by-step reasoning
with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05221 , 2024.
[131] Hangfeng He, Hongming Zhang, and Dan Roth. Socreval: Large language models with the socratic method for
reference-free reasoning evaluation. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2024 ,
pages 2736–2764, 2024.
[132] Lei Zhang, Yuge Zhang, Kan Ren, Dongsheng Li, and Yuqing Yang. MLCopilot: Unleashing the power of large
language models in solving machine learning tasks. In Yvette Graham and Matthew Purver, editors, Proceedings
of the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers) , pages 2931–2959, St. Julian’s, Malta, March 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[133] Sirui Hong, Xiawu Zheng, Jonathan Chen, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven
Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, et al. Metagpt: Meta programming for multi-agent collaborative
framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00352 , 2023.
[134] Mahyar Abbasian, Iman Azimi, Amir M Rahmani, and Ramesh Jain. Conversational health agents: A personal-
ized llm-powered agent framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02374 , 2023.
[135] Xiangru Tang, Anni Zou, Zhuosheng Zhang, Yilun Zhao, Xingyao Zhang, Arman Cohan, and Mark Ger-
stein. Medagents: Large language models as collaborators for zero-shot medical reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.10537 , 2023.
[136] Neel Guha, Julian Nyarko, Daniel Ho, Christopher Ré, Adam Chilton, Alex Chohlas-Wood, Austin Peters,
Brandon Waldon, Daniel Rockmore, Diego Zambrano, et al. Legalbench: A collaboratively built benchmark for
measuring legal reasoning in large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36,
2024.
[137] Eric Zelikman, Yuhuai Wu, Jesse Mu, and Noah Goodman. Star: Bootstrapping reasoning with reasoning.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35:15476–15488, 2022.
[138] Wolfgang Stammer, Felix Friedrich, David Steinmann, Hikaru Shindo, and Kristian Kersting. Learning by
self-explaining. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08395 , 2023.
24

--- PAGE 25 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
[139] Chaoxu Pang, Yixuan Cao, Qiang Ding, and Ping Luo. Guideline learning for in-context information extraction.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.05066 , 2023.
[140] Tianjun Zhang, Aman Madaan, Luyu Gao, Steven Zheng, Swaroop Mishra, Yiming Yang, Niket Tandon, and Uri
Alon. In-context principle learning from mistakes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05403 , 2024.
[141] Hao Sun, Yong Jiang, Bo Wang, Yingyan Hou, Yan Zhang, Pengjun Xie, and Fei Huang. Retrieved in-context
principles from previous mistakes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.05682 , 2024.
[142] Ling Yang, Zhaochen Yu, Tianjun Zhang, Shiyi Cao, Minkai Xu, Wentao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Bin
Cui. Buffer of thoughts: Thought-augmented reasoning with large language models, 2024.
[143] Harsha Nori, Yin Tat Lee, Sheng Zhang, Dean Carignan, Richard Edgar, Nicolo Fusi, Nicholas King, Jonathan
Larson, Yuanzhi Li, Weishung Liu, et al. Can generalist foundation models outcompete special-purpose tuning?
case study in medicine. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16452 , 2023.
[144] Junkai Li, Siyu Wang, Meng Zhang, Weitao Li, Yunghwei Lai, Xinhui Kang, Weizhi Ma, and Yang Liu. Agent
hospital: A simulacrum of hospital with evolvable medical agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.02957 , 2024.
[145] Jiachang Liu, Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, Bill Dolan, Lawrence Carin, and Weizhu Chen. What makes good
in-context examples for gpt- 3?arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.06804 , 2021.
[146] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are few-shot learners.
Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:1877–1901, 2020.
[147] Freda Shi, Xinyun Chen, Kanishka Misra, Nathan Scales, David Dohan, Ed H Chi, Nathanael Schärli, and Denny
Zhou. Large language models can be easily distracted by irrelevant context. In International Conference on
Machine Learning , pages 31210–31227. PMLR, 2023.
[148] Jiuhai Chen, Lichang Chen, Chen Zhu, and Tianyi Zhou. How many demonstrations do you need for in-context
learning? arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08119 , 2023.
[149] Zhenyu Wu, YaoXiang Wang, Jiacheng Ye, Jiangtao Feng, Jingjing Xu, Yu Qiao, and Zhiyong Wu. Openicl: An
open-source framework for in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.02913 , 2023.
[150] Xiaonan Li, Kai Lv, Hang Yan, Tianyang Lin, Wei Zhu, Yuan Ni, Guotong Xie, Xiaoling Wang, and Xipeng Qiu.
Unified demonstration retriever for in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04320 , 2023.
[151] Jiacheng Ye, Zhiyong Wu, Jiangtao Feng, Tao Yu, and Lingpeng Kong. Compositional exemplars for in-context
learning. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 39818–39833. PMLR, 2023.
[152] Hongjin Su, Jungo Kasai, Chen Henry Wu, Weijia Shi, Tianlu Wang, Jiayi Xin, Rui Zhang, Mari Ostendorf,
Luke Zettlemoyer, Noah A Smith, et al. Selective annotation makes language models better few-shot learners.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.01975 , 2022.
[153] Zhuosheng Zhang, Aston Zhang, Mu Li, and Alex Smola. Automatic chain of thought prompting in large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.03493 , 2022.
[154] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, Sharan Narang, Aakanksha Chowdhery, and
Denny Zhou. Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.11171 , 2022.
[155] Rishabh Agarwal, Avi Singh, Lei M Zhang, Bernd Bohnet, Stephanie Chan, Ankesh Anand, Zaheer Abbas,
Azade Nova, John D Co-Reyes, Eric Chu, et al. Many-shot in-context learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.11018 ,
2024.
[156] Mohammadreza Pourreza and Davood Rafiei. Din-sql: Decomposed in-context learning of text-to-sql with
self-correction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024.
[157] Qihuang Zhong, Kang Wang, Ziyang Xu, Juhua Liu, Liang Ding, Bo Du, and Dacheng Tao. Achieving> 97% on
gsm8k: Deeply understanding the problems makes llms perfect reasoners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14963 ,
2024.
[158] Dan Schumacher and Anthony Rios. Team utsa-nlp at semeval 2024 task 5: Prompt ensembling for argument
reasoning in civil procedures with gpt4. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01961 , 2024.
[159] Chengfeng Dou, Zhi Jin, Wenping Jiao, Haiyan Zhao, Zhenwei Tao, and Yongqiang Zhao. Plugmed: Im-
proving specificity in patient-centered medical dialogue generation using in-context learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.11508 , 2023.
[160] Yinheng Li, Shaofei Wang, Han Ding, and Hang Chen. Large language models in finance: A survey. In
Proceedings of the fourth ACM international conference on AI in finance , pages 374–382, 2023.
25

--- PAGE 26 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
[161] Shayne Longpre, Le Hou, Tu Vu, Albert Webson, Hyung Won Chung, Yi Tay, Denny Zhou, Quoc V Le, Barret
Zoph, Jason Wei, et al. The flan collection: Designing data and methods for effective instruction tuning. In
International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 22631–22648. PMLR, 2023.
[162] Victor Sanh, Albert Webson, Colin Raffel, Stephen H Bach, Lintang Sutawika, Zaid Alyafeai, Antoine Chaf-
fin, Arnaud Stiegler, Teven Le Scao, Arun Raja, et al. Multitask prompted training enables zero-shot task
generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08207 , 2021.
[163] Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human
feedback. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:27730–27744, 2022.
[164] Mike Conover, Matt Hayes, Ankit Mathur, Jianwei Xie, Jun Wan, Sam Shah, Ali Ghodsi, Patrick Wendell, Matei
Zaharia, and Reynold Xin. Free dolly: Introducing the world’s first truly open instruction-tuned llm. Company
Blog of Databricks , 2023.
[165] Andreas Köpf, Yannic Kilcher, Dimitri von Rütte, Sotiris Anagnostidis, Zhi Rui Tam, Keith Stevens, Abdullah
Barhoum, Duc Nguyen, Oliver Stanley, Richárd Nagyfi, et al. Openassistant conversations-democratizing large
language model alignment. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024.
[166] Can Xu, Qingfeng Sun, Kai Zheng, Xiubo Geng, Pu Zhao, Jiazhan Feng, Chongyang Tao, and Daxin Jiang.
Wizardlm: Empowering large language models to follow complex instructions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.12244 ,
2023.
[167] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou, Wei
Li, and Peter J Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text transformer. Journal of
machine learning research , 21(140):1–67, 2020.
[168] Srinivasan Iyer, Xi Victoria Lin, Ramakanth Pasunuru, Todor Mihaylov, Daniel Simig, Ping Yu, Kurt Shuster,
Tianlu Wang, Qing Liu, Punit Singh Koura, et al. Opt-iml: Scaling language model instruction meta learning
through the lens of generalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.12017 , 2022.
[169] Yizhong Wang, Hamish Ivison, Pradeep Dasigi, Jack Hessel, Tushar Khot, Khyathi Chandu, David Wadden,
Kelsey MacMillan, Noah A Smith, Iz Beltagy, et al. How far can camels go? exploring the state of instruction
tuning on open resources. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:74764–74786, 2023.
[170] Neil Houlsby, Andrei Giurgiu, Stanislaw Jastrzebski, Bruna Morrone, Quentin De Laroussilhe, Andrea Gesmundo,
Mona Attariyan, and Sylvain Gelly. Parameter-efficient transfer learning for nlp. In International conference on
machine learning , pages 2790–2799. PMLR, 2019.
[171] Junxian He, Chunting Zhou, Xuezhe Ma, Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick, and Graham Neubig. Towards a unified view
of parameter-efficient transfer learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.04366 , 2021.
[172] Tao Lei, Junwen Bai, Siddhartha Brahma, Joshua Ainslie, Kenton Lee, Yanqi Zhou, Nan Du, Vincent Zhao,
Yuexin Wu, Bo Li, et al. Conditional adapters: Parameter-efficient transfer learning with fast inference. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:8152–8172, 2023.
[173] Alexandra Chronopoulou, Matthew E Peters, Alexander Fraser, and Jesse Dodge. Adaptersoup: Weight averaging
to improve generalization of pretrained language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07027 , 2023.
[174] Aleksandar Petrov, Philip HS Torr, and Adel Bibi. When do prompting and prefix-tuning work? a theory of
capabilities and limitations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.19698 , 2023.
[175] Rabeeh Karimi Mahabadi, Sebastian Ruder, Mostafa Dehghani, and James Henderson. Parameter-efficient
multi-task fine-tuning for transformers via shared hypernetworks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.04489 , 2021.
[176] Wei Zhu and Ming Tan. Spt: learning to selectively insert prompts for better prompt tuning. In Proceedings of
the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 11862–11878, 2023.
[177] Qifan Wang, Yuning Mao, Jingang Wang, Hanchao Yu, Shaoliang Nie, Sinong Wang, Fuli Feng, Lifu Huang,
Xiaojun Quan, Zenglin Xu, et al. Aprompt: Attention prompt tuning for efficient adaptation of pre-trained
language models. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,
pages 9147–9160, 2023.
[178] Joon-Young Choi, Junho Kim, Jun-Hyung Park, Wing-Lam Mok, and SangKeun Lee. Smop: Towards efficient
and effective prompt tuning with sparse mixture-of-prompts. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 14306–14316, 2023.
[179] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu
Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685 , 2021.
26

--- PAGE 27 ---
arXiv Template A P REPRINT
[180] Mojtaba Valipour, Mehdi Rezagholizadeh, Ivan Kobyzev, and Ali Ghodsi. Dylora: Parameter efficient tuning of
pre-trained models using dynamic search-free low-rank adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.07558 , 2022.
[181] Qingru Zhang, Minshuo Chen, Alexander Bukharin, Nikos Karampatziakis, Pengcheng He, Yu Cheng, Weizhu
Chen, and Tuo Zhao. Adalora: Adaptive budget allocation for parameter-efficient fine-tuning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.10512 , 2023.
[182] Ning Ding, Xingtai Lv, Qiaosen Wang, Yulin Chen, Bowen Zhou, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Sparse
low-rank adaptation of pre-trained language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.11696 , 2023.
[183] Shih-Yang Liu, Chien-Yi Wang, Hongxu Yin, Pavlo Molchanov, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang, Kwang-Ting Cheng,
and Min-Hung Chen. Dora: Weight-decomposed low-rank adaptation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09353 , 2024.
[184] Ping Yu, Tianlu Wang, Olga Golovneva, Badr AlKhamissi, Siddharth Verma, Zhijing Jin, Gargi Ghosh,
Mona Diab, and Asli Celikyilmaz. Alert: Adapting language models to reasoning tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.08286 , 2022.
[185] Mingyu Zong and Bhaskar Krishnamachari. Solving math word problems concerning systems of equations with
gpt-3. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 37, pages 15972–15979, 2023.
[186] Kaiyu Yang, Aidan Swope, Alex Gu, Rahul Chalamala, Peiyang Song, Shixing Yu, Saad Godil, Ryan J Prenger,
and Animashree Anandkumar. Leandojo: Theorem proving with retrieval-augmented language models. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36, 2024.
[187] Chenhan Yuan, Qianqian Xie, Jimin Huang, and Sophia Ananiadou. Back to the future: Towards explainable
temporal reasoning with large language models. In Proceedings of the ACM on Web Conference 2024 , pages
1963–1974, 2024.
[188] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix,
Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 , 2023.
[189] Xin Lai, Zhuotao Tian, Yukang Chen, Yanwei Li, Yuhui Yuan, Shu Liu, and Jiaya Jia. Lisa: Reasoning
segmentation via large language model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition , pages 9579–9589, 2024.
[190] Xiang Yue, Xingwei Qu, Ge Zhang, Yao Fu, Wenhao Huang, Huan Sun, Yu Su, and Wenhu Chen. Mammoth:
Building math generalist models through hybrid instruction tuning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.05653 , 2023.
[191] Luong Trung, Xinbo Zhang, Zhanming Jie, Peng Sun, Xiaoran Jin, and Hang Li. Reft: Reasoning with reinforced
fine-tuning. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 7601–7614, 2024.
[192] Yunxiang Li, Zihan Li, Kai Zhang, Ruilong Dan, Steve Jiang, and You Zhang. Chatdoctor: A medical chat model
fine-tuned on a large language model meta-ai (llama) using medical domain knowledge. Cureus , 15(6), 2023.
[193] Hongyang Yang, Xiao-Yang Liu, and Christina Dan Wang. Fingpt: Open-source financial large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.06031 , 2023.
[194] Shengbin Yue, Wei Chen, Siyuan Wang, Bingxuan Li, Chenchen Shen, Shujun Liu, Yuxuan Zhou, Yao Xiao,
Song Yun, Wei Lin, et al. Disc-lawllm: Fine-tuning large language models for intelligent legal services. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.11325 , 2023.
[195] Kaiser Sun and Mark Dredze. Amuro & char: Analyzing the relationship between pre-training and fine-tuning of
large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06663 , 2024.
27
