# 2410.09455.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: ./document-conflict/2410.09455.pdf
# File size: 2838944 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
VERITAS-NLI: Validation and Extraction of
Reliable Information Through Automated Scraping
and Natural Language Inference
Arjun Shah†
Computer Engineering
D.J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
arjun.a.shah244@gmail.comHetansh Shah†
Computer Engineering
D.J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
shah.hetansh95@gmail.comVedica Bafna†
Computer Engineering
D.J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
vedicabafna@gmail.com
Charmi Khandor†
Computer Engineering
D.J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
charmik42@gmail.comProf. Sindhu Nair
Computer Engineering
D.J. Sanghvi College of Engineering
sindhu.nair@djsce.ac.in
Abstract —In today’s day and age where information is rapidly
spread through online platforms, the rise of fake news poses
an alarming threat to the integrity of public discourse, societal
trust, and reputed news sources. Classical machine learning and
Transformer-based models have been extensively studied for the
task of fake news detection, however they are hampered by
their reliance on training data and are unable to generalize on
unseen headlines. To address these challenges, we propose our
novel solution, leveraging web-scraping techniques and Natural
Language Inference (NLI) models to retrieve external knowledge
necessary for verifying the accuracy of a headline. Our system is
evaluated on a diverse self-curated evaluation dataset spanning
over multiple news channels and broad domains. Our best
performing pipeline achieves an accuracy of 84.3% surpassing
the best classical Machine Learning model by 33.3% and Bidi-
rectional Encoder Representations from Transformers (BERT)
by31.0% . This highlights the efficacy of combining dynamic
web-scraping with Natural Language Inference to find support
for a claimed headline in the corresponding externally retrieved
knowledge for the task of fake news detection.
Index Terms —Fake News Detection; Machine Learning; Nat-
ural Language Processing; Web-Scraping; Natural Language
Inference; Language Models.
I. I NTRODUCTION
As more and more people rely on digital platforms as their
primary source of information, the threat of fake news has been
exacerbated. This phenomena not only undermines the trust
in reliable sources but also has the potential to skew public
opinion [1]. The ease at which false narratives spread across
social media and online platforms underscores the urgent need
to address this issue [2].
With the proliferation of fake news as evidenced by the
spread of fabricated stories in the 2016 US elections [3], indi-
viduals are often overwhelmed and unsure about the authentic-
ity of the information they encounter. With Google’s Adsense
becoming the primary metric of success for a news site, a
†These authors contributed equally to this work.push has been made towards publishing ‘click-bait’ articles
which catch a reader’s attention [4]. Zhou et al. [5] highlighted
the explosive growth of fake news and it, consequentially
leading to the erosion of democracy, justice, and public trust.
Fake news is sometimes intentionally created and disseminated
as part of misinformation campaigns aimed at manipulating
public opinion or advancing specific agendas. Especially on
social media, studies reveal that while Facebook has seen a
decline in user interactions with misinformation since 2016,
Twitter continues to see a rise [6]. The findings highlight that
fake news and misinformation still prevail on social media
platforms [1] [2]. Hence ascertaining the veracity of news
articles will play a crucial role in preventing the spread of
misinformation, thereby guaranteeing the populace’s access to
trustworthy and empirically-supported knowledge.
This paper introduces a novel solution, VERITAS-NLI,
leverages state-of-the-art Natural Language Inference Models
for verifying claims by comparing them against externally
retrieved information from reputable sources in real-time
via web scraping techniques. Furthermore, we employ small
language models to generate questions based on the head-
line, enhancing the verification process through a question-
answering approach. To assess the consistency between the
scraped article and the input headlines, we employed NLI
models of varying granularity. Additionally, we constructed
an evaluation dataset by manually curating real headlines from
reputable sources and synthetically generating fake headlines
to simulate misinformation scenarios. These techniques enable
our model to adapt to dynamic content, as it does not rely
on static, outdated data. By continuously validating claims
against real-time information, our approach ensures that the
model remains relevant and effective in rapidly changing news
environments.
Our model analyzes the content of news articles, posts, or
other forms of media to identify potential indicators of fakearXiv:2410.09455v1  [cs.CL]  12 Oct 2024

--- PAGE 2 ---
news. This analysis involves examining the language, sources,
factual claims, pronoun-swapping, sentence-negation, named-
entity preservation and overall credibility of the information
presented. The detector cross-references the claims made in the
news content with the latest reliable and authoritative sources.
In the subsequent sections of this paper, we will delve
into the underlying methodology of VERITAS-NLI - Validation
and Extraction of Reliable Information Through Automated
Scraping and Natural Language Inference - elucidates the
key features and algorithms employed, and presents empirical
results demonstrating its efficacy and performance, which we
have compared to the related work reviewed in section 2.
We have conducted thorough comparisons by bench mark-
ing different approaches against our evaluation dataset, to
analyze their performance in real-world situations. We have
trained and compared multiple models from simple Machine-
Learning approaches like Logistic Regression to more complex
approaches utilising BERT and Natural Language Inference
models, notably FactCC [7] and SummaC [8].
II. L ITERATURE SURVEY
The initial attempts to counter false information relied on
manually checking claims like the site factchecker.in [9],
known for it’s efforts to verify claims and statements made in
the public domain. However, human fact-checking is resource-
intensive and may not scale as easily to handle the sheer vol-
ume of information available online. Human fact-checkers may
introduce subjectivity and potential bias in the interpretation
of claims.
Recent advancement in machine learning have shown
promise in improving the effectiveness of fake news de-
tection. A significant number of studies have explored the
use of classical machine learning algorithms for this pur-
pose. Abdullah-All-Tanvir et al. [10] and Pandey et. al. [11]
conducted comparative studies, both highlighting the higher
performance of Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Na ¨ıve
Bayes classifier in detecting fake news. Aphiwongsophon et
al. [12], further applied these methods to dataset collected
from twitter API, reaching an accuracy of 96.08%. However
each of these studies relied on a niche focus on a specific
topic, raising concerns about the broader applicability of these
findings. Ahmed et al. [13] employed n-gram analysis along
with machine learning techniques, again reporting SVM as the
best performing model.
Other algorithms have also been utilized like Ni et al. [14]
explored the use of Random Forest Classifier getting an accu-
racy of 68% on PolitiFact and GossiCop datasets. Kesarwani
et al. [15] used K-Nearest Neighbour (KNN) algorithm on a
dataset collected from BuzzFeed News getting an accuracy of
79%. Rajendran et al. [16] compared Decision Tree and Naive
Bayes, finding that Decision Trees outperformed Naive Bayes
and gave a mean accuracy of 99.70% when tested on fake
political news. Kotteti et al. [17] emphasized the importance of
data preprocessing, particularly the handling of missing vales,
while training classical machine learning models on the LIARdataset. The effectiveness of ensemble methods have also been
explored by researchers like Kaur et al. [18] who proposed a
multi-level voting ensemble models that combined multiple
classifiers based on their false prediction ratio. Bozuyla et
al. [19] extended this concept by utilizing AdaBoost ensemble
learning on top of Naive Bayes, improving the accuracy by
2%. Many of the studies presented face limitations in achiev-
ing high accuracy or generalizability due to their reliance
on event-specific datasets. While classical machine learning
models can be used as valuable bench marking tools, they
often fall short for the complex task of fake news detection
highlighting the need for more advanced and robust models
to improve accuracy and generalize findings across different
contexts.
Researchers at MIT [20] developed a deep learning network
that detects patterns in the language of fake news. This model
was trained on the data up to 2016 and is suggested to
be used with other techniques like automated fact-checkers.
Graph-based models like the one proposed by Zhang et
al. [21] introduced a self-supervised contrastive learning and a
new Bayesian graph Local extrema Convolution (BLC). This
method aggregates node features in a graph while accounting
for uncertainties in social media interactions. Despite achiev-
ing high accuracy on Twitter datasets, the model struggles
with the feature learning challenges posed by the power-
law distribution of node degrees in social networks. Another
approach presented by Li et al. [22] introduces KGAT, a neural
network utilizing graph attention networks, to perform fine-
grained fact verification by analysing relationships between
claim and evidence presented as a graph.
Transformer-based models like BERT have shown signifi-
cant promise in this task of fake news detection. Alghamdi et
al. [23] compared different machine learning and deep learning
techniques and found that BERT-base outperformed other
models using contextualized embeddings, demonstrating great
efficacy across multiple datasets. This aligns with the findings
of work done by Aggarwal et al. [24], where BERT achieved
an accuracy of 97.02% on NewsFN dataset, outperforming
LSTM and Gradient Boosted Tree models. Combating Covid-
19 misinformation has also been researched on, for example,
Alghamdi et al. [25] in his other paper used BERT model
on COVID-Twitter dataset getting an F1 score of 98%, along
with the work done by Ayoub et al. [26] who used DistilBERT
and SHAP (Shapley Additive exPlanations). Arun et al. [27]
reported a 96.5% accuracy by analyzing headlines and the
supporting text using BERT, and Kaliyar et al. [28] introduced
FakeBERT, a model that employs bidirectional learning to
enhance the contextual understanding of articles, contrasting
with traditional unidirectional approaches of looking at a
text sequence. Bataineh et al. [29] used Bidirectional Long
Short-Term Memory (Bi-LSTM) which is further optimized
by genetic algorithms.
In addition to transformers, hybrid models combining var-
ious deep learning techniques have been explored. Ajik et
al. [30] employed a hybrid approach combining Convolu-
tional Neural Networks (CNN) and Long Short-Term Mem-

--- PAGE 3 ---
ory (LSTM) networks, achieving an accuracy of 96% on a
dataset sourced from Kaggle. Dong et al. [31] emphasized
the importance of contextual features and user engagement
in the propagation of fake news. He combined supervised
and unsupervised learning paths with CNNs, performing well
even with limited labeled data. A similar approach was taken
by Li et al. [32] where a self-serving mechanism was used
to improve detection over traditional methods. Transformer
based models like BERT have been largely used for fake news
detection.
Techniques for natural language processing or NLP are
essential for spotting linguistic clues that point to false infor-
mation. Chesney et al. [33] brought attention to the difficulties
in using current NLP techniques because incongruence must
be identified in relation to the text it represents. Large language
models like GPT-3 have also been used in studies like the
one done by Farima et al. [34], where they used GPT-3 for
generating questions, responses and verifying facts. Despite
promising results (77-85% F1), has certain limitations like it
depends on the initial set of questions generated by LLMs and
operates on small-scale datasets, potentially limiting scalability
and generalizability. We utilize open source Small Language
Models (SLMs) and achieve comparable results on our eval-
uation dataset, presenting more quantitative findings. Another
study by Eun et al. [35] employs LoRa for fine-tuning LLMs
and evaluates claim accuracy across various claim styles by
adjusting the temperature setting in the model. However, it
majorly only focuses on combating fake news related to the
coronavirus period, raising concerns about the generalizability
of these claims.
The importance of social context in fake news detection
has been highlighted in various studies. Research done by
Shu et al. [36]talked about the challenges in understanding
the underlying characteristics of fake news, suggesting more
research on utilizing social context. Kang et al. [37] further
emphasized the importance of incorporating user engagement
metrics, showing that user information can enhance detection
even when data contains hate speech.
There have been suggestions to use hybrid approaches that
combines both linguistic and network-based methods like the
work done by Conroy [38] who presented a comprehensive
survey of current technologies and methodologies for detecting
fake news. They emphasised that tools should be designed to
augment human judgement, not replace it.
Several datasets and evaluation metrics have been de-
veloped to facilitate research in fake news detection. The
FEVER dataset, introduced by Thorne et al. [39], serves as a
benchmark for fact extraction and verification tasks. Hassan
et al. [40] made a data collection site to collect ground-
truth labels of the sentences and deployed a automated fact-
checking system on the 2016 presidential primary debate and
compared its performance to professional news and organi-
sations. Reddy et al. [41] leveraged ClaimBuster model for
claim detection and employed a Bart-large model trained on
a MNLI (MultiNLI) corpus as zero-shot topic-filtering system
to filter out claims related to the topics under consideration.In summary, the research on fake news detection has shown
significant progess in developing various methods and models.
However, several research gaps have been observed as noted
by Almahadi et al. [42] in his comprehensive review of
different approaches of fake news detection (FND) . One
notable limitation is the lack of real-world implementation
of these techniques. While theoretical models have been
explored extensively, there is a need to address practical issues
related to scalability, robustness, and the ethical implications
of implementing FND in the real-world scenario. Moreover,
exploration of novel ML algorithms specifically for FND that
address the limitations of classical ML algorithms, such as
their reliance on static training data and inability to keep up
with the current news in a dynamic environment. Our work
aims to tackle both of these areas, moving closer to a robust
and practical solution for combating fake news.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Training Dataset
In our study, we utilize the LIAR dataset , a publicly
available resource for fake news detection compiled from
POLTIFACT.COM, a Pulitzer Prize-winning website. The
credibility of this dataset can be attributed to the multiple
human evaluated statements along with authentication of the
POLITIFACT editor [17] [23] [31].
The dataset samples news claims from various multimedia
sources ranging from news releases, TV/radio interviews,
campaign speeches, advertisements and social media platforms
such as Twitter, Facebook etc. This dataset primarily focuses
on societal and government related news topics ranging from
economy, taxes, campaign-biography, elections, education,
jobs are some the most represented subjects. The claims based
on these subjects are the most prone to misinterpretation, and
spreading of misinformation by tweaking minuscule sections
of the claim to drastically change the implication of the claim.
This serves as strong foundation for the culmination of a robust
fact and integrity analyzer developed on the foundation of
classical NLP Techniques and cross-verification using web-
scraping methodologies [43] [44].
The LIAR dataset consists of 12.8k statements labeled for
truthfulness, collected over a ten-year period. Each statement
is accompanied by metadata such as the speaker, context, and
a detailed judgment report. The LIAR dataset is structured
to include several fields that capture various dimensions of
each statement recorded. Here’s an elaboration on each type
of field found in the LIAR dataset:
•Label Description: The truthfulness rating assigned to the
statement. LIAR dataset uses a multilabel system, which
can include labels such as ”True”, ”Mostly True”, ”Half
True”, ”Barely True”, ”False”, and ”Pants on Fire”.
•Label Assignment : The rationale or explanation is pro-
vided by fact-checkers on why a particular label was as-
signed to the statement. This field often includes evidence
or reasoning based on research, reports, and data analysis.

--- PAGE 4 ---
The dataset consists of a count for each of the labels, for
a particular statement. The aggregate of these labels are
compared and the claim is thus assigned a primary label
for representation.
We convert these 6 classes into two distinct categories
(True/False) to abate the ambiguity posed by these 6 varying
classes. By reducing the classes to binary outcomes, we
emphasize the fundamental distinction between accurate and
inaccurate information. Additionally, the binary categorization
mitigates subjective disagreements that may arise from the
nuanced differences between the original labels, adhering to
consistent labeling standards.
The label mapping we used for the conversion is:
Mapping = {
’true’: True,
’mostly-true’: True,
’half-true’: True,
’barely-true’: False,
’false’: False,
’pants-fire’: False
}
We made use of the entire transformed LIAR dataset for the
training of classical machine learning models and transformer
based models for binary classification.
Fig. 1. The figure presents the label distribution of the LIAR dataset. Labels
categorize claims as ”True”, ”Mostly True”, ”Half True”, ”Barely True”,
”False”, and ”Pants on Fire”. The label denotes the credibility of each headline
in the dataset.
B. Evaluation Dataset
To evaluate the performance of the models trained, we
propose a new manually curated dataset consisting of the latest
headlines of 2024. This dataset with more recent headlines
help us benchmark the efficacy of the various models trainedin identifying unreliable headlines in a dynamic and rapidly-
evolving landscape.
The dataset consists of headlines from a wide range of
domains, including science, sports, pop culture, politics, and
business. It contains 346 credible headlines collected from
various trusted sources such as CNN, USNews, The Guardian,
BBC, The New York Times, Reuters, Times of India, CNBC,
and others.
Using each reliable headline, we generate a corresponding
unreliable headline using a Small Language Model(SLM),
specifically microsoft/Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct .
We devised a zero-shot prompt without any examples,
resulting in a total of 692 headlines in our evaluation dataset.
The small language models were prompted to modify
the reliable headlines through a combination of techniques
such as sentence negation, number swaps, replacing named
entities, and by injecting noise into the headline. The
aim was to create convincing fake news headlines that can
serve as a challenging evaluation metric for the models trained.
Unreliable Headline Generation Prompt :"Given the
true headline ,you have to make changes
to it using a combination of Sentence
negation, Number swaps, Replacing Named
Entities and Noise Injection to generate a
fake news headline. The output should be
only the generated fake news headline to
evaluate my fake news model."
Fig. 2. Example of an Unreliable Headline generated using Microsoft’s Phi-3,
when prompted with our zero-shot prompting approach.

--- PAGE 5 ---
C. Classical Model Performance Benchmarks
1)Classical Machine Learning :Classical Machine Learn-
ing algorithms have been used extensively for the task of
analyzing the veracity of news articles [11] , capitalizing on
the wealth of data provided by datasets like LIAR to train
models.
Prior to feeding the data from the LIAR dataset for the training
of these models, a series of pre-processing steps have to be
taken.
•Stopword Removal : In this step extremely common words
(known as stopwords),that carry little meaning for the
task of prediction, are removed from the text to reduce
the noise in the dataset.
•Token Filtering : we perform token filtering prior to
lemmatization in order to exclude non-alphabetic tokens.
This step ensures that the non-alphanumeric characters
do not impede model training.
•Lemmatization : Words in the news articles and headlines
are reduced to their root form to normalize the text.This
is done using NLTK’s WordNetLemmatizer.
•TF-IDF Vectorizer : TF-IDF stands for Term Frequency
Inverse Document Frequency.It is a mathematical method
that is used to represent how important a word is within
a document relative to a collection or corpus. This im-
portance of a word is directly proportional to how often
it appears in a document but is offset by the frequency
of the word in the complete text corpus.
Term Frequency (TF) The term frequency tf(t, d)is
defined as:
tf(t, d) =ft,dP
t′∈dft′,d
where ft,dis the frequency of term tin document d, and
the denominator is the sum of all term frequencies in
that document. Inverse Document Frequency (IDF) The
inverse document frequency id f(t, D)is defined as:
id f(t, D) = logN
|{d∈D:t∈d}|
where Nis the total number of documents in the corpus
D, and|{d∈D:t∈d}|is the number of documents
where the term tappears.
Using the aforementioned preprocessing techniques, we
trained the following models:
•Linear SVC : Linear Support Vector classifier is a base
classical model which attempts to find a hyperplane
to maximize the distance between classified samples.
It requires and functions around a kernel which pro-
vides adaptations for dealing with non-linear data-
points. [11] [18].
•Multinomial Naive-Bayes : This classical model belongs
to the family of probabilistic classifiers derived from
the eminent Bayes Theorem. Multinomial Naive Bayes
is a variant of Naive Bayes used for document classi-
fication which makes it a desirable choice to use forour particular problem. Each sample represents a feature
vector in which certain events have been counted in the
multinomial model [11] [16] [19].
•Random Forest Classifier : This model represents a meta-
estimator creating a number of decision tree classifiers
considering sub-samples of words in the pre-processed
dataset to improve predictive accuracy [14].
•Logistic Regression : It is used to model the relationship
between one dependent and one or more independent
variables. This model predicts the likelihood of some-
thing falling into a specific group. It uses the logistic
function to map the linear combination of independent
variables to a probability between 0 and 1 for each
class. [10] [13] [18] [36].
2)Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Trans-
formers :The Liar Dataset consists of very comprehensive
claims, for which the labels naturally rely heavily on nuanced
sentence interpretation and context. Owing to the performance
demonstrated by transformers in capturing textual informa-
tion we naturally diverted our attention to transformer based
models. Fine-tuning pre-trained models such as BERT-base-
uncased has allowed us to explore an architecture capable of
identifying discrepancies in general news patterns due to it’s
deeper understanding of context through vector representations
of characters in the English language stemming from the fact
that it has been trained on a large corpus of over three billion
words [45].
BERT is based on the Transformer [46] architecture, which
captures the context of words in a sentence by considering
words from both left and right contexts. This is essential for
language tasks like fake news detection, where understanding
the context in which words appear can determine the authen-
ticity of the information [23]–[28]. BERT is pre-trained on
”masked language modeling” and ”next sentence prediction”
and for our specific use-case, ”sequence classification”. This
pre-training helps the model learn a wide range of language
patterns and knowledge, which might not be present in the
specific training dataset, however, fine-tuning it on our dataset
using transfer-learning can provide an advantage while solv-
ing a specific problem such as fact-checking. For the fine-
tuning process, task-specific layers are added to the BERT
architecture for the downstream sequence-classification task,
and only these newly added layers are trained to minimize
computational costs.
BERT’s bidirectional context understanding helps it effec-
tively handle polysemous words (words with multiple mean-
ings) better than models that consider only one-directional
context or no contextual information at all. This is important
because within polysemous words and the words that come
before and after them, the severity of the statement is identified
on varying scales. For example, the negative connotation of a
word in a particular context is enhanced based on the synonym
of the word used. Unlike classical models that often require
significant customization and feature engineering, BERT can
be fine-tuned with a small number of task-specific examples
to achieve high performance, leveraging the extensive pre-

--- PAGE 6 ---
TABLE I
CLASSICAL MACHINE LEARNING MODEL PERFORMANCE METRICS FOR LIAR AND EVALUATION TESTSETS
Model Accuracy Precision Recall F1-Score
Models trained and tested on LIAR dataset
LinearSVC 59.34% 0.64 0.66 0.65
Logistic Regression 60.52% 0.63 0.72 0.68
MultinomialNB 60.54% 0.61 0.83 0.70
Random Forest Classifier 59.76% 0.63 0.71 0.67
Models trained on LIAR and tested using the Evaluation dataset
LinearSVC 49.13% 0.49 0.49 0.49
Logistic Regression 50.00% 0.50 0.50 0.54
MultinomialNB 51.02% 0.51 0.64 0.57
Random Forest Classifier 49.27% 0.49 0.62 0.55
Model trained on LIAR and tested using the Evaluation dataset
BERT-Base-Uncased 53.34% 0.52 0.71 0.60
training. The procedure involving the fine-tuning of a BERT
model on the LIAR dataset begins with an intricate tok-
enization process. For this process, we use the WordPiece
algorithm [47] :
1)Text Normalization: Convert all text to lowercase (for
BERT-base-uncased) and perform unicode normaliza-
tion.
Text→Normalized Text
2)Punctuation Splitting: Split the text at punctuation,
adding spaces around each punctuation mark.
Normalized Text →Split Text
3)WordPiece Tokenization: Break words into subword
units based on a trained vocabulary. Unknown words are
split into smaller subwords that exist in the vocabulary.
Word→Subword 1+Subword 2+. . .+Subword n
4)Adding Special Tokens: Add special tokens such as
[CLS] ,[SEP] for specific tasks (e.g., classification,
question answering).
Final Tokens =[CLS] +Tokenized Text +[SEP]
This process enables BERT to handle a wide range of
language inputs and effectively manage both common and
rare words. This is done along with padding and trunca-
tion to ensure equal length input vectors for uniformity. We
employ transfer learning techniques using the BERT-base-
uncased model, sourced from the Hugging Face transformers
library. The methodology focuses extensively on the fine-
tuning process:
•Initialization: Fine-tuning begins with the pre-trained
models which have been initially trained on a large
corpus, such as the BooksCorpus and English Wikipedia.
This pre-training has equipped the models with a robust
understanding of general language contexts.
•Task-Specific Adjustments: The models are then further
fine-tuned on a labeled dataset specific to our use case.
This process involves tweaking the last few layers of the
model so that the model can align its outputs with the
task at hand. For our requirement of binary-classification
Fig. 3. Fine-Tuning of BERT using transfer learning utilizing the LIAR
dataset to ascertain the veracity of claimed headlines.
of fake news using the LIAR dataset, it entails training
the model on the labeled dataset, consisting of news
articles, headlines and labels. This adjustment allows the
model to conform its outputs to align with the specific
requirements of binary classification.
•Hyperparameter Optimization:
–num train epochs = 1 : Given the high repre-
sentational power of BERT and its pre-trained na-
ture, a single epoch is often sufficient to fine-tune
the model. Experimental results found that using a
greater number of epochs lead to model-overfitting.
–perdevice train batch size = 16 and
perdevice eval batch size = 32: Smaller batch
sizes for training help in maintaining a balance
between memory usage and effective learning.
–warmup steps = 100 : Implementing a warmup
phase at the beginning of training where learning
rates are gradually increased helps in stabilizing
the learning process, preventing the model from
converging too quickly to a sub-optimal solution.
–learning rate = 5e−5: This learning rate is found
to be most suitable for many models for the Adam
Optimizer which was used in this particular model
training.
–weight decay = 0.001: This helps in regularizing

--- PAGE 7 ---
the model and preventing over-fitting, which is cru-
cial for a model as large as BERT.
–fp16 = True: This enables the model to train faster
and consume less memory while maintaining the
training precision, making it feasible to train larger
models or use larger batch sizes.
IV. P ROPOSED SOLUTION
Our proposed solution, VERITAS-NLI explores various
novel pipelines that make use of web-scraping, Small Lan-
guage Models (SLM) and Natural Language Inference (NLI)
models at its core. This solution mimics the natural cog-
nitive processes humans use to evaluate whether a partic-
ular claim is reliable or unreliable. The pipelines, namely:
Question-Answer Pipeline, Article Pipeline
and Small Language Model Pipeline are a testa-
ment to this underlying intuition and demonstrate it’s effec-
tiveness in the subsequent sections.
A. Web Scraping Techniques
We make use of web-scraping techniques to retrieve
external knowledge based on the raw input headline, the
questions generated by small language models to verify the
headline, the ’People Also Ask’ section of a Google search
and Google’s ’Quick Answer’ to retrieve relevant information
in real-time. This real-time knowledge is critical for our
task of detecting fake news in a dynamic and fast-changing
environment [44], [48].
Selenium Based Scraping : Our pipeline leverages a
’chromedriver’ and adaptive web-scraping of the document-
object-model(DOM) by traversing the XML Tree to acquire
external information to aid in verifying the input [43]. There
are multiple different approaches we take to scrape external
information relevant to the headline, they are outlined below :
•Fact-Based Headline Verification: For user headlines
that represent facts we can verify them by scraping
the text that is provided by the Google Search ’Quick
Answer’. These webpages do not change their content
and layout frequently and are known as static pages
which allows us to simply retrieve the Quick Answer by
scraping that HTML tag represented in the XML tree.
•Top-K Articles Retrieval: A naive google search is
performed initially to retrieve the top-k links correspond-
ing to the headline. This is followed by the scraping of
relevant ’titles’ and useful ’contents’ from these links
(generally represented by <h> and<p> html tags) to
cross-validate the claimed headline.
•People Also Asked: We incorporate Google Search’s
’People Also Asked’ (PAA) questions relevant to the
news-headline entered by the user. The People Also
Asked question provides different interpretations for a
particular headline most frequently inferred by people.
This also provides an all-rounded context for the evalua-
tion of the claimed headline. Additionally, more popular
claims will consist of a greater number of questions which
will inherently provide a more comprehensive contextthat assists the model to identify confidence in a given
claim as well as sometimes point out the ambiguity of
claims that are opinionated, unclear, or shrouded in noise.
•SLM Generated Questions: Furthermore, we make use
of Small Language Models ( Mistral-7B-Instruct
-v0.3 [49] or Microsoft’s Phi-3-mini-4k-
instruct [50]) to generate a question that helps us
retrieve relevant information needed to validate the
reliability of a given headline.
We utilize trusted sources for information retrieval and
adhere to the ’robots.txt’ laid down by all of the sources
such as CNN, USNews, The Guardian, BBC, The New York
Times, Reuters, Times of India, CNBC, etc which scrutinize
the published articles on their respective platforms and are
generally regarded as trustworthy news outlets.
A ’robots.txt’ file is a directive used by website adminis-
trators to communicate with search engine crawlers and web
scrapers, specifying which pages or sections of a site they
are permitted to access and index. Its primary purpose is to
manage web traffic, ensuring that crawlers do not overwhelm
the server with excessive requests. By controlling the areas of
the site accessible to bots, the ’robots.txt’ file helps optimize
server performance, protect sensitive information, and priori-
tize which content should be visible in search engine results.
B. Question-Answer Pipeline
In this pipeline we experiment with an amalgamation of
methods using the Google Search ’Quick Answer’ which is
highly dependent on whether the given input headline is a
hard fact or not. So to make this a more thorough pipeline
we’ve incorporated the ’People Also Asked’ (PAA) questions
for the input headline, as a fallback to the ’Quick Answer’
scraping. However, we found that the ’People Also Asked
Section’ of a particular Google page is heavily dependant
on user interaction for a particular headline if the input is
an uncommon occurrence it may not be represented by the
’People Also Ask’ section. In this case we have a terminating
fallback which resorts to the naive scraping of the top-k articles
that are found.
The third pipeline in Figure 5, highlights the flow of
the web-scraping and claim verification process. The scraped
content is then passed to the headline-verifying NLI model as
the source-text (premise) and the input headline is the claim
(hypothesis). The model then generates a prediction along
with a confidence score which represents how well the claims
made in the headline are supported by the externally scraped
information.
C. Small Language Model Pipeline
Within this pipeline, we explore the use of Small Language
Models to generate questions that can be used scrape more
relevant content to verify the entered claim. We follow a
scraping approach identical to the one used in the Question-
Answer Pipeline with an added zero-shot [51] SLM question
generation step [34].

--- PAGE 8 ---
This pipeline involves the transformation of the user
entered input headline into a context-aware question
using an Open Source Small Language Model, like
Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 [49] and Microsoft’s
Phi-3-mini-4k-instruct [50] which have 7.25 and
3.82 billion parameters respectively, these questions help
us retrieve more direct answers from the web to fact-check
claims against external sources. Leveraging the capabilities
of a Small Language Model for question generation should
likely assist us in retrieving more pertinent information
helping verify the headline.
Fig. 4. Example of a question generated by Mistral 7B to aid in the knowledge
retrieval, a crucial step of the Small Language Model Pipeline.
Figure 4 illustrates the question-generation process using
the input headline ’India wins 2023 ICC Men’s Cricket
World Cup’ along with a zero-shot prompt and the question
generated by the SLM is ’Who won the 2023 ICC Men’s
Cricket World Cup?’ , a question like this significantly
increases the probability of obtaining a direct response on the
web.
Example Question Generation Prompt : You’re tasked
with fact-checking news headlines for
accuracy. Given a headline, generate 1
question that needs to be true to verify
the headlines authenticity using a Google
search to scrape the answer from the quick
search box. Ask the crucial questions
first.
Pipeline 2 in Figure 5 illustrates the question
generation process for an input headline, by promptingMistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 . This generated question
is then used for the subsequent knowledge retrieval from the
’Quick-Answer’ section of Google Search. The generated
question simplifies the scraping workflow and helps retrieve
a direct answer to verify the veracity of the claim.
D. Article Pipeline
The article pipeline leverages a web-scraping methodol-
ogy [43] to gather data from various online sources system-
atically. This approach allows for the extraction of relevant
content, such as content related to a particular input headline,
based on the Top - K links to articles retrieved as illustrated
in Pipeline 1 of Figure 5. The web scraper acquires both the
headings, and the content from these links and the model is
supplied with this retrieved information for the verification
process. By structuring the pipeline in this way, it ensures that
the process is both efficient and reliable, the inclusion of an
article’s content helps provide a rich-contextual understanding
of the topic at hand to help verify the claim.
Interestingly, the research has shown that this naive ap-
proach leads to more accurate outcomes. In this context,
a simple yet well-organized strategy for scraping and pro-
cessing data performs better than more intricate alternatives.
To contrast this pipeline intimately with the previous three
where ‘Quick Answer’ and ‘People Also Asked’ summaries
are provided to the model may be small or incomplete for
certain user queries misguiding the model. The best output
is closely correlated with the scraping of the right amount
of information quantity to quality (coherence) of the scraped
content. This is further highlighted from the statistical results
obtained and delineated in subsequent results section.
The scraped articles pertinent to the claim, are then pro-
cessed by Natural Language Inference (NLI) models, specif-
ically FactCC [7] and SummaC [8], that make use of the
externally retrieved knowledge to analyze and detect potential
inconsistencies within the claimed headline.
E. NLI-based Models for Headline Inconsistency Detection
The next step in our proposed solution is to detect incon-
sistencies in the headline (hypothesis) by comparing it with
the source (premise) text fetched from the web. This step is
analogous to the task of Natural Language Inference (NLI).
These NLI models are designed to determine the relationship
between two pieces of text, a ’premise’ and a ’hypothesis’,
and are classified into 3 categories:
•Entailment: The hypothesis is logically supported by the
premise.
•Contradiction: The hypothesis is logically inconsistent
with the premise.
•Neutral: The hypothesis neither entails nor contradicts
the premise.
The performance of these models has seen substantial im-
provements in recent years, supported by large training
datasets like MNLI [52], SNLI [53] and VitaminC [54].
Modern attention-based architectures exhibit proficiency that
parallels human performance for this task. [8]

--- PAGE 9 ---
Fig. 5. Architecture Diagram of our proposed solution VERITAS-NLI, detailing the workflow of our 3 proposed pipelines.
1) FactCC: One approach of our proposed solution,
VERITAS-NLI leverages FactCC [7] , a model developed
to ensure that summaries generated by abstractive models
remain factually consistent with their source documents [7].
This section delves into the architecture of FactCC and its
contributions to the field of text summarization. FactCC is
built upon the BERT architecture, leveraging its pre-trained
powerful contextual embedding capabilities. The model oper-
ates under a weakly-supervised learning framework, which is
designed to handle the challenges of factual consistency in text
summarization. It was trained on synthetic data which enablesit to be a perfect candidate for downstream learning tasks.
FactCC employs a multi-task [55] learning approach, where
the model is simultaneously trained on several related tasks:
•Consistency Identification: Determining if a trans-
formed sentence from the source document remains fac-
tually consistent.
•Support Extraction: Identifying and extracting the spe-
cific spans in the source document that support the factual
consistency of the summary.
•Error Localization: Pinpointing and highlighting the
spans within the summary that are factually inconsistent.

--- PAGE 10 ---
TABLE II
PROPOSED SOLUTION OUTPUT FOR A HEADLINE
Type of Content Headline and Scraped Questions Retrieved Article/Direct Answer NLI-Model
Output Score
Input Headline : Max Verstappen wins 2023 F1 world title
Phi-3 Generated
QuestionWho won the 2023 Formula 1
World Championship?Max Verstappen 0.9992
(CORRECT)
People Also
AskedHas Verstappen won the World
Championship in 2023?Has Verstappen won the World Championship in 2023? F1’s
most races left in a season before championship win.It
became clear very early on that Verstappen would become a
triple world champion in 2023. His season has been that
dominant that the Red Bull driver sealed the championship
in October after the Qatar GP sprint race.0.9968
(CORRECT)
Scraped Article Max Verstappen crowned Formula
One world championMax Verstappen crowned Formula One world champion
Max Verstappen was crowned Formula One world champion
for the third time, securing the title in the sprint race at the
Qatar Grand Prix on Saturday.There are few outcomes in
sport that seem inevitable. Human and, in F1, engineering
error can strike at any moment, with competitors waiting to
pounce. But occasionally, someone comes along and
dominates in a way that any anticipation, any lingering
tension regarding the outcome dissipates Verstappen’s
coronation0.8776
(CORRECT)
2) SummaC (Summary Consistency): It obtains state-
of-the-art results for the task of inconsistency detection
in summarization of documents. The fundamental aspect
that sets SummaC [8] apart is its segmentation of longer
documents into sentence-level units, thus changing the
granularity at which NLI models are applied.
For each input (document,summary)
•The summary (S)is split into Nsentence segments and
similarly the Document (D)is split into Msegments.
•For every such summary and document-sentence pair, the
NLI model calculates the likelihood of three possible re-
lationships (Entailment, Contradiction and Neutral), this
results in a pair matrix.
•SummaC-ZS : The pair matrix is then reduced to a one-
dimensional vector by taking the maximum value of each
column. The mean of this vector is then taken to produce
the final output score.
•SummaC-Conv : The intuition behind SummaC-Conv
is to be able to capture NLI scores generated over
the pair matrix instead of the extremas as was in the
case of SummaC-ZS. A histogram of the distribution is
constructed on which binning is performed. This binning
matrix is then passed through a 1D-Convolution. The
convolution layer scans the summary histograms one at
a time, and compiles each into a scalar value for each
summary.
•The task at hand requires our models to output binary
predictions, thus for our SummaC models an optimal
decision threshold is required to generate binary classifi-
cation outputs. The threshold is determined through a cal-
ibration process utilizing 20% of the evaluation dataset,
with thresholds in the range of [-1,1]. The computation
of this threshold is in accordance with the original study
that proposed the SummaC architecture [8].V. R ESULTS
In our comprehensive study on the efficacy of machine
learning and deep learning models for fake news detection,
our study finds significant performance differences between
classical Machine Learning models, BERT models and our
proposed Transformer-based pipelines that allow it to access
external knowledge in order to classify the news headline at
hand.
Classical Machine Learning models rely heavily on static
training data, this dependency severely hampers their ability
to classify news headlines in a dynamic environment. These
straightforward approaches cannot adapt effectively to ever-
changing relationships and contexts inherent in real-world
scenarios.
From the results in Table I, the accuracy’s of classical ma-
chine learning models for the given binary-class classification
task of news headlines on the training dataset produce an
average F1-score of 0.675 and an accuracy of 60.04% when
tested on the LIAR dataset using a 70:30 train-test split.
However, when these models were trained entirely on the
LIAR dataset and then tested on our new proposed evaluation
dataset, they produce an average F1-score of 0.537 and
accuracy of 49.86%. This sharp decline highlights the models’
reliance on static training data, which limits their ability to
accurately classify unseen news articles in a dynamic and
ever-changing environment. The drop-off in performance is
exacerbated by the fact that the models tested on our evaluation
dataset were trained on a larger corpus of news headlines, due
to the lack of a train-test split.
Thus, the inability of these models to adequately generalize
from their training data to accurately classify current headlines,
renders them unsuitable for the task at hand. Nevertheless,
these classical models serve as an important baseline for
subsequent, more advanced models.

--- PAGE 11 ---
TABLE III
PERFORMANCE METRICS OF OUR PIPELINES FOR EACH OF THE NLI
MODELS
Pipeline Metrics FactCC SummaC
Zero-Shot Conv
Precision 0.55 0.79 0.63
Question-Answer Recall 0.56 0.75 0.60
Pipeline F1 0.55 0.77 0.62
Accuracy 54.80% 77.60% 62.50%
Precision 0.54 0.77 0.69
SLM Pipeline Recall 0.47 0.74 0.57
(Mistral-7B) F1 0.50 0.75 0.63
Accuracy 53.20% 75.80% 65.80%
Precision 0.53 0.77 0.69
SLM Pipeline Recall 0.53 0.60 0.55
(Phi-3) F1 0.53 0.67 0.62
Accuracy 53.28% 70.90% 65.40%
Precision 0.78 0.90 0.96
Article Pipeline Recall 0.79 0.77 0.70
F1 0.78 0.83 0.81
Accuracy 78.02% 84.30% 83.60%
To address the above limitations, our focus turns to a fine-
tuned BERT, a transformer-based model, for binary classi-
fication of news articles. The process of fine-tuning these
transformer models for our specific task empowered this study
to explore an architecture with the ability to the understand the
true-context within nuanced headlines.
Although these models showed initial promise they also
suffered the same pitfalls as the classical approaches due to
their reliance on static training data, which is demonstrated
in Table I. On comparing the performance of BERT to the
classical ML models, BERT outperforms them marginally with
a∼3.5percent gain in accuracy.
A.How effective is our Proposed Solution for the given task?
Notably, our proposed solutions VERITAS-NLI, signifi-
cantly outperforms prior approaches. From the results pre-
sented in Table III, The highest accuracy achieved from our
proposed pipelines is 84.3% , by the Article-Pipeline using
SummaC-ZS as the NLI-based consistency checking model.
This is a substantial 33.3% gain over the best performing
classical machine learning model (MultinomialNB) and a
31.0% gain over the transformer-based BERT model. Out
of the 12 pipeline configurations we tested (4 scraping ap-
proaches and 3 headline inconsistency detection NLI models),
10 configurations demonstrated superior accuracy compared to
all baseline models.
The reliability of the solution proposed stems from our
novel web-scraping techniques for dynamic information re-
trieval for the verification of the claim. With growing interpo-
lation in writing techniques for articles our proposed solution
captures, the discrete idea of the document and claim by
making use of sentence level granularity. This also avoids
having to retrain the model on newer data creating a robust
solution for verification of claims.
Our solution provides explainability by providing the ex-
ternally retrieved knowledge used to arrive at a decision as
well as the links to Top-K articles fetched as displayed inFigure 5. This alleviates the black box created by other models
and provides a way to interpret the models decision making
process.
Table II elucidates the working of our proposed solution,
with a detailed view of its performance for a given headline
covering all pipeline approaches.
Summary : The Article-Pipeline with SummaC-ZS
achieved the highest accuracy of 84.3% ,surpassing the
best classical ML model by 33.3% and BERT by 31%.
Out of the 12 evaluated pipeline configurations - 10 of
them outperformed all baselines in terms of accuracy.
B.Which NLI-based Model performs best for Headline
Inconsistency Detection?
For headline inconsistency detection, the SummaC model
consistently outperforms FactCC, particularly due to its appli-
cation of NLI-models on sentence-level pairs of a premise and
hypothesis. SummaC is designed to capture fine-grained in-
consistencies by analyzing individual sentence-level relations,
while FactCC focuses on document-level fact-checking. This
enhanced granularity allows SummaC to better detect subtle
inconsistencies between headlines and their corresponding
scraped content.
Moreover, SummaC’s two variants—SummaC-ZS (zero-
shot) and SummaC-Conv (Convolution)—outperform FactCC
across all evaluation metrics. This superior performance can
be attributed to SummaC’s unique approach of leveraging
a Natural Language Inference (NLI) pair-matrix. The NLI
matrix enables SummaC to systematically compare sentence
pairs and identify contradictions or entailments with greater
precision, leading to more accurate headline inconsistency
detection.
This is consistent with the results obtained in Table III,
the average accuracy for FactCC, SummaC-ZS and SummaC-
Conv based pipelines is 59.83% ,77.15% and 69.33% re-
spectively. The SummaC pipelines outperform the FactCC
pipelines by 17.32% and9.50% each. In the case of SummaC-
ZS, one drawback is its sensitivity to extreme values due mean
calculation. However, since news headlines are predominantly
one sentence, this potential drawback is no longer a hindrance
to its performance for our use-case.
Summary : SummaC-ZS and SummaC-conv outper-
form FactCC by 17.32% and 9.50% respectively in
this task, due to their use of NLI models to analyze
sentence-level premise and hypothesis pairs.
C.Which Small Language Models (SLMs) perform best,
and how effective are the generated questions?
In our study we make use of two small language models
for the question generation step, the central idea was for the
generated questions to help scrape more specific information
needed to verify the claim.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Fig. 6. Common and Unique Correct-Incorrect Decisions Between Pipelines
TheMistral-7b pipelines have an average accuracy of
64.93% andPhi-3 pipelines have an accuracy of 63.37% .
This indicates that both these language models exhibit similar
proficiency in the question generation task, despite Phi-3
having slightly over half the parameters compared to Mistral.
However, the small language model pipelines only attain a
maximum accuracy of 75.80% , which is decisively beaten by
the84.3% accuracy reached by the Article pipeline.
FLEEK [34] highlights that the quality of evidence retrieval
is dependent on the initial set of questions generated by the
language models as a potential limitation in their study,this
is the probable factor for the degradation in performance
compared to the naive article approach.
Summary : The Mistral-7b andPhi-3 pipelines
obtain average accuracies of 64.93% and 63.37%
respectively, demonstrating similar performance de-
spite Phi-3 having fewer parameters.However, these
pipelines fall short compared to the 84.3% accuracy
of the Article pipeline.
D.What are the performance characteristics and relation-
ships between the Top-performing Classical models, BERT-
based models and our Proposed Solution?
This research question aims to gain insights into the per-
formance characteristics of the various legacy models, our
proposed solution and to assess how independent or unrelated
they are.
We take 2 different viewpoints to assess the degree of
independence and utilize a Venn diagram to evaluate the
number of distinct correct and incorrect decisions across these
models and pipelines:
•Legacy Models vs. Our Best-Performing Pipeline
According to the results presented in Table I & III, We
pick the best performing classical ML models (Multino-
mial Naive Bayes, Logistic Regression and BERT-base-
uncased) and compare them with our best-performing
pipeline - Article Pipeline with SummaC Zero-Shot.From the venn diagrams in Figure 6A and 6B, we notice
that the number of distinct correct decisions made by
our solution far exceeds the corresponding numbers for
the legacy models. Furthermore, our solution also has the
lowest number of distinct incorrect decisions. Another
insight lies in the significant overlap in incorrect decisions
(Figure 6B) made by the legacy models, further highlight-
ing the inability of models trained on static training data
to generalize for the latest news headlines.
•Comparison Between Our Best Performers
Figures 6C and 6D present a detailed comparison of
correct and incorrect classifications produced by our
best-performing pipelines. The Venn diagram empha-
sizes the distinctly correctly classified data points for
the question-based pipelines, QNA SummaC ZS and
Mistral SummaC ZS. Notably, both of these pipelines
uniquely classifies 10 data points, with a total of 54
correct classifications that are not shared with other
pipelines. In contrast, the article-based pipelines show far
fewer unique correct classifications. This suggests that
question-based pipelines are more effective at retrieving
contextually valuable content in certain cases, partic-
ularly when addressing more nuanced questions about
the claim. However, while QNA SummaC ZS and Mis-
tralSummaC ZS exhibit the highest number of distinct
correct classifications, they also account for the most
distinct incorrect classifications. This indicates that while
these pipelines excel in a specific category of summaries
pertaining to 7.84% of the evaluation dataset, they lack
generalizability compared to the article-based pipelines,
which perform more consistently across broader contexts.
This further highlights that the quality of the content-
retrieval is directly tied to the quality of the Question
generated by the SLM as highlighted in the above sec-
tions. We also note that the Article SummaC ZS has
significantly fewer distinct incorrect decisions than its
counterpart Article FactCC which further cements its su-
periority for the task, due to its sentence-level granularity.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Fig. 7. Boxplot’s illustrating execution times for various steps of our Proposed
Pipeline.
Summary : The best-performing classical models fall
short of the unique correct and incorrect decisions
metric compared to the Article Pipeline with SummaC
Zero-Shot. The SummaC based Article pipelines make
far fewer distinct incorrect decisions compared to
their FactCC counterparts, highlighting their efficacy
in detecting inconsistencies.
E.How efficient are our Proposed Pipelines?
To assess the performance of our solution, we conducted a
representative analysis by calculating the average processing
time. This was achieved by stratified sampling to form a
slice of our evaluation dataset, which provided a balanced
subset of true and false headlines. To ensure reproducibility
and maintain consistency, all the experiments were performed
on Google Colab with an NVIDIA Tesla T4 GPU (15.4GB
GDDR6 memory) and Intel(R) Xeon(R) CPU @ 2.00GHz
with 12.7GB RAM.
We divided our pipeline into two stages, the web-scraping
stage and the NLI for inconsistency detection stage and eval-
uated them separately. As depicted in Figure 7, the time taken
for each sub-task is visualised as a box-plot. Furthermore,
Table IV contains detailed information for each pipeline, well
as the total duration inference for each.
The crucial task of scraping content to retrieve information
from the web, is the most time-intensive, still averaging only
2.9seconds in the SLM-Phi3 pipeline, 4.1seconds in theSLM-Mistral pipeline, 5.7seconds for the Question-Answer
pipeline and 6.7seconds for the Article pipeline.
The next stage involves the use of NLI models to evaluate
the support for the input headline (hypothesis) in the retrieved
information (premise). We choose to examine this from two
different perspectives :
•NLI-Model Specific Time Metrics
The average inference time for the NLI-models across
our 4 pipelines is 0.047s ,0.188s ,0.101s for FactCC,
SummaC-ZS and SummaC-Conv respectively.
We observe that the time taken by the SummaC-ZS and
SummaC-Conv models is greater than FactCC, this is due
to the increased granularity of the SummaC Models as it
segments the inputs into sentences that are individually
compared. The increased time is a valuable trade off for a
sizeable improvement in the accuracy of the model across
the board as seen in Table III.
•Pipeline Specific Time Metrics
Similarly the average inference times are 0.168s ,0.049s ,
0.040s and 0.192s for the Article, SLM Mistral-7B,
SLM Phi-3 and Question-Answer pipelines respectively.
The average time taken is greatest for the Question-
Answer and Article pipelines due to the larger volume of
text retrieved by these 2 approaches, resulting in higher
inference times.
Summary : Our performance evaluation procedure for
the 4 pipelines involves dividing the process into web
scraping and NLI stages. Web scraping averaged 2.9-
6.7 seconds, while NLI inference times ranged from
0.047s to 0.192s across models and pipelines. Larger
text volumes in the Question-Answer and Article
pipelines resulted in higher inference times overall.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this study, we explore the efficacy of various Machine
Learning and Transformer Models for the task of fake news
detection, our findings highlight the inadequate performance
characteristics of these classical models due to their reliance
on static training data. Our proposed solution, VERITAS-
NLI overcomes this limitation by combining advanced web-
scraping techniques for the retrieval of external knowledge,
required to verify a claim, and state-of-the-art Natural Lan-
guage Inference Models to find support for the headline in the
retrieved text. The results exhibit a significant improvement
in effectiveness of our proposed solution in comparison to
benchmark models, with gains of over 30% in terms of
accuracy.
These enhancements are crucial for advancing the field
and ensuring that automated systems can keep pace with the
continually evolving strategies employed in the dissemination
of fake news, ultimately safeguarding the integrity of public
discourse.

--- PAGE 14 ---
TABLE IV
MEAN VALUES OF TIMEMETRICS AND SUMMATION OF SCRAPE , FACTCC, S UMMA C ZS, AND SUMMA C C ONV TIMES FOR EACH PIPELINE
Pipeline Scrape
Time (s)FactCC
Time (s)SummaC
ZS Time
(s)SummaC
Conv Time
(s)Sum of
Scrape +
FactCC
Time (s)Sum of
Scrape +
SummaC
ZS Time
(s)Sum of
Scrape +
SummaC
Conv Time
(s)
Article 6.7175 0.0328 0.2514 0.2193 6.7503 6.9689 6.9368
SLM Mistral-7B 4.1240 0.0505 0.0464 0.0486 4.1745 4.1704 4.1726
SLM Phi-3 2.8883 0.0507 0.0330 0.0352 2.9390 2.9213 2.9235
Question-Answer 5.7986 0.0538 0.4205 0.1005 5.8524 6.2191 5.8991
VII. D ATA AVAILABILITY
All datasets and code files used in our research study can
be found in our Github Repository [56].
REFERENCES
[1] H. Kudarvalli and J. Fiaidhi, “Experiments on detecting fake news
using machine learning algorithms,” International Journal of Reliable
Information and Assurance , vol. 8, pp. 15–26, June 2020.
[2] A. Zubiaga, A. Aker, K. Bontcheva, M. Liakata, and R. Procter,
“Detection and resolution of rumours in social media: A survey,” ACM
Comput. Surv. , vol. 51, feb 2018.
[3] S. Subramanian, “Inside the macedonian fake-news complex,” WIRED ,
2020. Accessed May 7, 2024.
[4] P. Biyani, K. Tsioutsiouliklis, and J. Blackmer, ““8 amazing secrets
for getting more clicks”: Detecting clickbaits in news streams using
article informality,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence , vol. 30, 2016.
[5] X. Zhou and R. Zafarani, “A survey of fake news: Fundamental theories,
detection methods, and opportunities,” ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 53, sep
2020.
[6] H. Allcott, M. Gentzkow, and C. Yu, “Trends in the diffusion of
misinformation on social media,” Research & Politics , vol. 6, no. 2,
p. 2053168019848554, 2019.
[7] W. Kryscinski, B. McCann, C. Xiong, and R. Socher, “Evaluating the
factual consistency of abstractive text summarization,” in Proceedings
of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing (EMNLP) (B. Webber, T. Cohn, Y . He, and Y . Liu, eds.),
(Online), pp. 9332–9346, Association for Computational Linguistics,
Nov. 2020.
[8] P. Laban, T. Schnabel, P. N. Bennett, and M. A. Hearst, “Summac: Re-
visiting nli-based models for inconsistency detection in summarization,”
Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics , vol. 10,
pp. 163–177, 2022.
[9] FactChecker.in, “Factchecker.in is india’s first dedicated fact check
initiative.” Factchecker. Accessed on [insert access date].
[10] A. A. Tanvir, E. M. Mahir, S. Akhter, and M. R. Huq, “Detecting fake
news using machine learning and deep learning algorithms,” in 2019
7th International Conference on Smart Computing & Communications
(ICSCC) , pp. 1–5, 2019.
[11] S. Pandey, S. Prabhakaran, N. V . S. Reddy, and D. Acharya, “Fake news
detection from online media using machine learning classifiers,” Journal
of Physics: Conference Series , vol. 2161, p. 012027, 2022.
[12] S. Aphiwongsophon and P. Chongstitvatana, “Detecting fake news with
machine learning method,” in 2018 15th International Conference on
Electrical Engineering/Electronics, Computer, Telecommunications and
Information Technology (ECTI-CON) , pp. 528–531, 2018.
[13] H. Ahmed, I. Traore, and S. Saad, “Detection of online fake news
using n-gram analysis and machine learning techniques,” in Intelligent,
Secure, and Dependable Systems in Distributed and Cloud Environments
(I. Traore, I. Woungang, and A. Awad, eds.), (Cham), pp. 127–138,
Springer International Publishing, 2017.
[14] B. Ni, Z. Guo, J. Li, and M. Jiang, “Improving generalizability of
fake news detection methods using propensity score matching,” CoRR ,
vol. abs/2002.00838, 2020.[15] A. Kesarwani, S. S. Chauhan, and A. R. Nair, “Fake news detection on
social media using k-nearest neighbor classifier,” in 2020 International
Conference on Advances in Computing and Communication Engineering
(ICACCE) , pp. 1–4, 2020.
[16] T. Dinesh, “Higher classification of fake political news using decision
tree algorithm over naive bayes algorithm,” Revista Gest ˜ao Inovac ¸ ˜ao e
Tecnologias , vol. 11, pp. 1084–1096, 06 2021.
[17] C. M. M. Kotteti, X. Dong, N. Li, and L. Qian, “Fake news de-
tection enhancement with data imputation,” in 2018 IEEE 16th Intl
Conf on Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing, 16th Intl
Conf on Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, 4th Intl Conf on Big
Data Intelligence and Computing and Cyber Science and Technology
Congress(DASC/PiCom/DataCom/CyberSciTech) , pp. 187–192, 2018.
[18] S. Kaur, P. Kumar, and P. Kumaraguru, “Automating fake news detec-
tion system using multi-level voting model,” Soft Computing , vol. 24,
pp. 9049–9069, Jun 2020.
[19] M. Bozuyla, “Adaboost ensemble learning on top of naive bayes
algorithm to discriminate fake and genuine news from social media,”
European Journal of Science and Technology , 10 2021.
[20] N. O’Brien, S. Latessa, G. Evangelopoulos, and X. Boix, “The language
of fake news: Opening the black-box of deep learning based detectors,”
tech. rep., Center for Brains, Minds and Machines (CBMM), November
2018.
[21] G. Zhang, S. Zhang, and G. Yuan, “Bayesian graph local extrema
convolution with long-tail strategy for misinformation detection,” ACM
Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data , vol. 18, no. 4, 2024.
[22] Z. Liu, C. Xiong, M. Sun, and Z. Liu, “Fine-grained fact verification
with kernel graph attention network,” in Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (D. Jurafsky,
J. Chai, N. Schluter, and J. Tetreault, eds.), (Online), pp. 7342–7351,
Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2020.
[23] J. Alghamdi, Y . Lin, and S. Luo, “A comparative study of machine learn-
ing and deep learning techniques for fake news detection,” Information ,
vol. 13, no. 12, 2022.
[24] A. Aggarwal, A. Chauhan, D. Kumar, M. Mittal, and S. Verma, “Clas-
sification of fake news by fine-tuning deep bidirectional transformers
based language model,” p. 163973, 04 2020.
[25] J. Alghamdi, Y . Lin, and S. Luo, “Towards covid-19 fake news detection
using transformer-based models,” Knowledge-Based Systems , vol. 274,
p. 110642, 2023.
[26] J. Ayoub, X. J. Yang, and F. Zhou, “Combat covid-19 infodemic
using explainable natural language processing models,” Information
Processing & Management , vol. 58, no. 4, p. 102569, 2021.
[27] A. S. Arun, V . P. G. Subhash, and S. Shridevi, “Fake news detection
in mainstream media using bert,” in Computational Methods and Data
Engineering (V . K. Asari, V . Singh, R. Rajasekaran, and R. B. Patel,
eds.), (Singapore), pp. 379–390, Springer Nature Singapore, 2023.
[28] R. K. Kaliyar, A. Goswami, and P. Narang, “Fakebert: Fake news
detection in social media with a bert-based deep learning approach,”
Multimedia Tools and Applications , vol. 80, pp. 11765–11788, Mar
2021.
[29] A. Al Bataineh, V . Reyes, T. Olukanni, M. Khalaf, A. Vibho, and
R. Pedyuk, “Advanced misinformation detection: A bi-lstm model
optimized by genetic algorithms,” Electronics , vol. 12, no. 15, 2023.
[30] E. Ajik, G. Obunadike, and F. Echobu, “Fake news detection using
optimized cnn and lstm techniques,” Journal of Information Systems
and Informatics , vol. 5, pp. 1044–1057, 08 2023.

--- PAGE 15 ---
[31] X. Dong, U. Victor, and L. Qian, “Two-path deep semisupervised
learning for timely fake news detection,” IEEE Transactions on Com-
putational Social Systems , vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 1386–1398, 2020.
[32] X. Li, P. Lu, L. Hu, X. Wang, and L. Lu, “A novel self-learning semi-
supervised deep learning network to detect fake news on social media,”
Multimedia Tools Appl. , vol. 81, p. 19341–19349, jun 2022.
[33] S. Chesney, M. Liakata, M. Poesio, and M. Purver, “Incongruent
headlines: Yet another way to mislead your readers,” in Proceedings of
the 2017 EMNLP Workshop: Natural Language Processing meets Jour-
nalism (O. Popescu and C. Strapparava, eds.), (Copenhagen, Denmark),
pp. 56–61, Association for Computational Linguistics, Sept. 2017.
[34] F. F. Bayat, K. Qian, B. Han, Y . Sang, A. Belyi, S. Khorshidi, F. Wu,
I. F. Ilyas, and Y . Li, “Fleek: Factual error detection and correction with
evidence retrieved from external knowledge,” 2023.
[35] E. C. Choi and E. Ferrara, “Fact-gpt: Fact-checking augmentation via
claim matching with llms,” 2024.
[36] K. Shu, A. Sliva, S. Wang, J. Tang, and H. Liu, “Fake news detection on
social media: A data mining perspective,” ACM SIGKDD Explorations
Newsletter , vol. 19, 08 2017.
[37] M. Kang, J. Seo, C. Park, and H. Lim, “Utilization strategy of user
engagements in korean fake news detection,” IEEE Access , vol. 10,
pp. 79516–79525, 2022.
[38] N. K. Conroy, V . L. Rubin, and Y . Chen, “Automatic deception detection:
Methods for finding fake news,” Proceedings of the Association for
Information Science and Technology , vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 1–4, 2015.
[39] J. Thorne, A. Vlachos, C. Christodoulopoulos, and A. Mittal, “FEVER: a
large-scale dataset for fact extraction and VERification,” in Proceedings
of the 2018 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Volume 1 (Long Papers) (M. Walker, H. Ji, and A. Stent, eds.),
(New Orleans, Louisiana), pp. 809–819, Association for Computational
Linguistics, June 2018.
[40] N. Hassan, F. Arslan, C. Li, and M. Tremayne, “Toward automated
fact-checking: Detecting check-worthy factual claims by claimbuster,”
Proceedings of the 23rd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining , 2017.
[41] R. Gangi Reddy, S. C. Chinthakindi, Z. Wang, Y . Fung, K. Conger,
A. ELsayed, M. Palmer, P. Nakov, E. Hovy, K. Small, and H. Ji,
“NewsClaims: A new benchmark for claim detection from news with
attribute knowledge,” in Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing (Y . Goldberg, Z. Kozareva,
and Y . Zhang, eds.), (Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates), pp. 6002–6018,
Association for Computational Linguistics, Dec. 2022.
[42] J. Alghamdi, S. Luo, and Y . Lin, “A comprehensive survey on machine
learning approaches for fake news detection,” Multimedia Tools and
Applications , vol. 83, pp. 51009–51067, May 2024.
[43] B. Zhao, Web Scraping , pp. 1–3. 05 2017.
[44] M. Bhujbal, M. Bibawanekar, and P. Deshmukh, “News aggregation
using web scraping news portals,” International Journal of Advanced
Research in Science, Communication and Technology , vol. V olume 3,
pp. 2581–9429, 07 2023.
[45] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “Bert: Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” 2019.
[46] A. Vaswani, “Attention is all you need,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems , 2017.
[47] X. Song, A. Salcianu, Y . Song, D. Dopson, and D. Zhou, “Fast word-
piece tokenization,” https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2012.15524 , 2021.
[48] A. Upadhye, “Automatic news summarization using web scraping,”
INTERANTIONAL JOURNAL OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH IN ENGI-
NEERING AND MANAGEMENT , vol. 08, pp. 1–5, 05 2024.
[49] A. Q. Jiang, A. Sablayrolles, A. Mensch, C. Bamford, D. S. Chaplot,
D. d. l. Casas, F. Bressand, G. Lengyel, G. Lample, L. Saulnier, et al. ,
“Mistral 7b,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825 , 2023.
[50] M. Abdin, S. A. Jacobs, A. A. Awan, J. Aneja, A. Awadallah,
H. Awadalla, N. Bach, A. Bahree, A. Bakhtiari, H. Behl, et al. , “Phi-
3 technical report: A highly capable language model locally on your
phone,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14219 , 2024.
[51] Y . Li, “A practical survey on zero-shot prompt design for in-context
learning,” in Proceedings of the Conference Recent Advances in Natural
Language Processing - Large Language Models for Natural Language
Processings , RANLP, p. 641–647, INCOMA Ltd., Shoumen, BUL-
GARIA, 2023.[52] A. Williams, N. Nangia, and S. R. Bowman, “A broad-coverage
challenge corpus for sentence understanding through inference,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1704.05426 , 2017.
[53] S. R. Bowman, G. Angeli, C. Potts, and C. D. Manning, “A large
annotated corpus for learning natural language inference,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1508.05326 , 2015.
[54] T. Schuster, A. Fisch, and R. Barzilay, “Get your vitamin c!
robust fact verification with contrastive evidence,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2103.08541 , 2021.
[55] R. Caruana, “Multitask learning,” Machine learning , vol. 28, pp. 41–75,
1997.
[56] https://github.com/Arjun-254/VERITAS-NLI .
