# 2501.08686.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: ./document-conflict/2501.08686.pdf
# File size: 2105012 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
1
Knowledge Graph-based Retrieval-Augmented
Generation for Schema Matching
Chuangtao Ma, Member, IEEE , Sriom Chakrabarti, Arijit Khan, Senior Member, IEEE , B´alint Moln ´ar
Abstract —Traditional similarity-based schema matching methods are incapable of resolving semantic ambiguities and conflicts in
domain-specific complex mapping scenarios due to missing commonsense and domain-specific knowledge. The hallucination problem
of large language models (LLMs) also makes it challenging for LLM-based schema matching to address the above issues. Therefore,
we propose a Knowledge Graph-based Retrieval- Augmented Generation model for Schema Matching, referred to as the
KG-RAG4SM . In particular, KG-RAG4SM introduces novel vector-based, graph traversal-based, and query-based graph retrievals, as
well as a hybrid approach and ranking schemes that identify the most relevant subgraphs from external large knowledge graphs (KGs).
We showcase that KG-based retrieval-augmented LLMs are capable of generating more accurate results for complex matching cases
without any re-training. Our experimental results show that KG-RAG4SM outperforms the LLM-based state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods
(e.g., Jellyfish-8B) by 35.89% and30.50% in terms of precision and F1 score on the MIMIC dataset, respectively; KG-RAG4SM with
GPT -4o-mini outperforms the pre-trained language model (PLM)-based SOTA methods (e.g., SMAT) by 69.20% and21.97% in terms
of precision and F1 score on the Synthea dataset, respectively. The results also demonstrate that our approach is more efficient in
end-to-end schema matching, and scales to retrieve from large KGs. Our case studies on the dataset from the real-world schema
matching scenario exhibit that the hallucination problem of LLMs for schema matching is well mitigated by our solution.
Index Terms —Schema Matching, Knowledge Graph-based Retrieval, Graph RAG, Large Language Model, Data Integration
✦
1 I NTRODUCTION
SCHEMA matching aims to compare and conform sev-
eral schemas from various data sources [1], in which
the semantic correspondences between the source schema
and target schema are identified based on the mapping
of schema elements. Typically, the similarity of each pair
of attribute names is calculated, and the mapping results
are given based on the comparison between similarity
and threshold. However, the generated mappings from
similarity-based schema matching is unable to represent
the full semantic correspondence between the source and
target schemas, because only the equivalent relationships
are identified while the taxonomic relationships are ignored.
Moreover, the semantic heterogeneity in various schemas
brings obstacles while establishing the correspondence [2],
where human interventions and domain knowledge are
required to determine whether a mapping pair should be
accepted or discarded. In particular, there are several large-
scale databases of various management information systems
(MIS), e.g., electronic health records (EHR) data, which need
to be mapped into a standardized or modernized database
for efficient data access and management. Due to the large
number of entities and attributes organized and stored
•Chuangtao Ma is with the Department of Computer Science, Aalborg
University, Aalborg, Denmark. E-mail: machuangtao@ieee.org. Some part
of this work was done during his Ph.D. at E¨ otv¨ os Lor´ and University.
•Sriom Chakrabarti is with the Department of Computer Science, Aalborg
University, Aalborg, Denmark. E-mail: scha@cs.aau.dk.
•Arijit Khan is with the Department of Computer Science, Aalborg Uni-
versity, Aalborg, Denmark. E-mail: arijitk@cs.aau.dk.
•B´ alint Moln´ ar is with the Department of Information Systems, Faculty
of Informatics, E¨ otv¨ os Lor´ and University, Budapest, Hungary. Email:
molnarba@inf.elte.hu.
`CONDITION_OCCURRENCE` `hun_case_i (o)` `hun_case_diag`
(a) The hun_case_i(o)
table and attributes  from
the source data model. (b) The hun_case_diag
table and attributes  from
the source data model . (c) The medical condition  table
and attribu tes from the target data
mode l.  Textual Descriptions:
 provider_id:  
 A foreign key to 
 the Provider  in the 
 PROVIDER table who was 
 responsible for capturing   
 (diagnosing) the Condition. Textual Descriptions :
 ATTEND_DOCT OR: 
 The user identifier  of the 
 treating doctor of the 
 case;  A foreign key that 
 refers to the stamp_no 
 identifier in  hun_doctor 
 table recording the   
 treating doctor .`Condition_occurrence_id`
`person_id`
`condition_start_date` 
`condition_concept_id` 
`condition_start_datetime` 
`condition_end_date`
`condition_end_datetime` 
`condition_status_concept_id` 
`condition_type_concept_id` 
`stop_reason`
`provider_id`
`visit_occurrence_id`
`condition_source_value`
`condition_source_concept_id`
`condition_status_source_value` 
`visit_detail_id``CASE_NO` 
`MRN` 
`ADMIT_DATE` 
`ADMIT_TIME` 
`ADMIT_REASON` 
`DISCH_DATE` 
`DISCH_TIME` 
`CASE_STAT`  
`ATTEND_DOCTOR` 
`INTERN_TYPE`  `CASE_NO`
`CODE`
`TYPE` 
`DESCR_ORIG` 
`DOCTOR` 
`DESCR_USER` 
`DIAG_DATE` 
`DIAG_TIME` Fig. 1. Example of schema matching in the EHR data model. Table (a)
and Table (b) are from the source schema, and Table (c) is from the
target schema. The textual description for attributes originates from the
database design documents. The solid arrows indicate the correspond-
ing mappings that are marked with the same color.
among heterogeneous databases, duplicates of entities and
attributes exist in various databases. Here, is an example of
schema matching between the e-MedSolution data model
[3] and the OMOP CDM data model [4] from the real-world
scenario is given in Figure 1.
As shown in Figure 1, the ATTEND_DOCTOR from
hun_case_i(o) table is a duplicate attribute with thearXiv:2501.08686v1  [cs.DB]  15 Jan 2025

--- PAGE 2 ---
2
DOCTOR ofhun_case_diag table in the source schema,
since both of which are matched with provider_id from
CONDITION_OCCURRENCE table in the target schema. With-
out acquiring additional common knowledge or domain
expertise from the external knowledge bases, it is difficult to
detect such duplicates and find these potential mappings.
To handle the above issues, past works propose to
integrate the textual description of entities and attributes
with the large language models (LLMs) [5], e.g., fine-tuning
LLMs [6], [7], prompting LLMs [8], and augmenting LLMs
[9] to generate the top- kmappings. Other works train the
pre-trained language models (PLMs) by classifying the po-
tential mappings based on the trained classifier [10], [11].
However, the SOTA LLM-based and PLM-based schema
matching is still incapable of handling the conflicts and
ambiguities at the semantic level (e.g., acronym, abbrevia-
tion, relatedness, etc.), for instance, identifying the matches
between ATTEND_DOCTOR andprovider_id in the above
example, since existing methods could only incorporate the
contextual information at the textual and syntactic level [12],
[13].
The required semantic matching information could be
available in external knowledge graphs (KGs) that store
large-scale, real-world facts using graph structures in a
highly-curated manner [14], where a node represents an
entity, and an edge denotes a relationship between two
entities. The structured semantic knowledge in a KG makes
it possible to enhance the language models with knowl-
edge inference by injecting commonsense knowledge, fac-
tual knowledge, and domain knowledge, thereby resolv-
ing complex matching cases without any re-training of
LLMs. Recent works also reveal that the performance of
the downstream tasks of natural language processing and
understanding [15]–[17], e.g., text classification, text mining,
question answering (QA), sentiment analysis, entity link-
ing, etc., could be improved significantly by using exter-
nal knowledge. In particular, the commonsense and fact-
based KGs and domain-specified KGs can be introduced to
augment the LLMs for better handling the above complex
schema matching case. This is mainly facilitated by the com-
monsense and fact-based KGs, such as Wikidata [18], which
contain several common knowledge for the taxonomic and
hierarchical relationships, acronyms, abbreviations, related-
ness, etc. Domain-specified KGs (such as SNOMED-CT [19])
also contain rich relationships between, e.g., healthcare and
medical terms, concepts, and codes with synonyms, which
are useful for augmenting the LLMs to handle complex
schema matching cases in the healthcare databases.
For instance, consider the mapping between
ATTEND_DOCTOR and provider_id . The retrieved
information from a commonsense KG can augment and
guide LLMs to respond with the correct answer. As
demonstrated in Figure 2, the retrieved KG context can help
LLMs find the potential semantic similarity between the
two attributes, which will augment the capability of LLMs
for schema matching task.
KGs are large-scale, for instance, Wikidata includes mil-
lions of ⟨subject, predicate, object ⟩triplets [18]. It is not tech-
nically feasible to augment the LLMs with these large-scale
KGs directly, because the contexts of LLMs have a finite
length [20]. Besides, context-poisoning issues may occur if
A foreign key to the Provider  in the
PROVIDER table who was responsible for
capturing (diagnosing) the Condition. The user identifier  of the treating doctor of
the case.;A  foreign key that refers to the
stamp_no identifier in hun_doctor table
recording the treating doctor .`ATTEND_DOCTOR` 
`CONDITION_OCCURRENCE``hun_case_i (o)`
instance ofinstance of
subclass ofMedical doctor
(physician)
Health
professionalsubclass ofOccupation
Healthcare
provider
Service
providersubclass ofRetrieve Relevant Subgraph from KGsSchema Matching Question:  
Do the attribute ATTEND_DOCT OR  with its textual  description
[des1 ]  from table hun_case_i (o) and the attribute provider_id  with its
textual [des2]  from table  CONDITION_OCCURRENCE  are semantically
matched with each other?
The semantic match can be
considered partial match in
pratice.Given the provided Knowledge
Graph (KG) context, it
suggests a potential semantic
similarity between the two
attributes, as they both refer to
healthcare providers involved
in medical processes. 
Both are foreign keys
referencing other tables,
they point to different
entities. The semantic
difference lies in their
specific roles and the
tables they reference.  
These attributes are not
semantically matched with
each other. Augmented with  
retrieved subgraphs`provider_id`Fig. 2. The Role of KG context in augmenting LLMs for schema match-
ing.
too much irrelevant knowledge is utilized to augment the
prompt. As a result, the performance of the LLM-based
schema matching will be decreased [5]. To address the above
challenges, we propose KG-RAG4SM , a knowledge graph-
based retrieval-augmented generation (graph RAG) model
for schema matching and data integration. This method
integrates vector-based, query-based, and traversal-based
retrievals to identify the relevant subgraphs from large KGs
and prunes the irrelevant knowledge by using a ranking
scheme. Then, it leverages the retrieved subgraphs to aug-
ment the LLMs and prompts for generating the final results
for the complex schema-matching task. KG-RAG4SM also
excludes any re-training of LLMs.
KGsSchema Matching Question:  
Do the attribute ATTEND_DOCT OR  with its
textual  description [des1 ]  from table  hun_case_i (o) and
the attribute provider_id  with its textual [des2]  from
table  CONDITION_OCCURRENCE  are semantically
matched with each other?KG T riplet:
<head entity 1, realtion 1, tail entity 1>
...
<head entity n, realtion n, tail entity n >
  Top-10 Retrieved KG T riplet:
 <Patient (Q181600), subclass of (P279), customer(Q8525835)>
 <Customer(Q8525835), subclass of (P279), beneficiary (Q2596417) >
 <Hospital Records Database(Q5908569), instance of (P31), database(Q8543)>
 <DrugBank (Q1 1225544), instance of (P31),  online database (Q7094076) >
 ...
 <CPR number (Q366795), instance of (P31), national identification number (Q1 140371) > 
Question
Vector KG Triplet
Vector 
(1) Vector Similarity
Search
Refined T op-2 KG T riplet:
patient, subclass of, customer , 
customer , subclass of, beneficiary
 AnswersQuestion
Embedding
(3) Augment
Prompts with 
Subgraph
(2) Subgraph Refinement
based on ranking
 with vector score
Fig. 3. Overview of our proposed KG-RAG4SM method. Given schema
matching questions and an external knowledge graph, we (1)retrieve
the relevant KG triplets based on vector similarity between questions
embeddings and KGtriplet embeddings; (2)prune the retrieved relevant
KG triplets with vector similarity-based ranking; (3)augment prompts
with the retrieved and refined subgraphs from large-size KGand gener-
ate the final answer for the given schema matching questions.
As shown in Figure 3, we introduce novel knowledge
graph retrieval and subgraph pruning techniques to re-
trieve and prune the relevant subgraphs from large KGs
for augmenting the prompts and LLMs, which provide the
knowledge-augmented language models for schema match-
ing and data integration. Our method compares favourably
with baseline models [6], [11], [21] in handling the semantic
conflicts of complex mapping cases, by retrieving the rele-
vant subgraphs from large KGs and conciliating the external
knowledge bases with LLMs for augmenting the schema
matching.

--- PAGE 3 ---
3
To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to augment
the LLMs and prompts for schema matching tasks with the re-
trieved relevant subgraphs from large KGs . Unlike the emerging
Graph RAG methods [22], [23], which retrieve knowledge
from local and small-size graphs built from text chunks, our
method retrieves the relevant subgraph from the external
and large-scale knowledge graphs in a real-world scenario.
Our contributions are outlined as follows.
•We propose a knowledge graph-based retrieval-
augmented generation model for schema matching,
which leverages retrieved relevant subgraphs from large
KGs to augment the prompts and LLMs for generating
the results of schema matching.
•We introduce novel subgraph retrieval methods via
vector-based, query-based, and graph traversal-based
graph retrievals, as well as a hybrid approach that inte-
grates them to identify the relevant subgraphs from large
KGs that are useful for LLMs to generate matching results.
•We prune the retrieved subgraphs by removing the irrel-
evant entities and edges based on a ranking scheme to
provide concise knowledge for augmenting the LLMs and
prompts and avoid the context poisoning issue.
•We conduct a thorough experimental evaluation with
three benchmark datasets to verify the effectiveness, ef-
ficiency, and scalability of our solution, compared to exist-
ing LLM and PLM-based schema matching methods.
•We introduce EMED , a new large-scale schema match-
ing dataset from the real-world healthcare domain. This
will promote future research on domain-specific schema
matching and data integration.
•We showcase the performance of KG-RAG4SM in a real-
world large-scale schema matching task from the health-
care domain by conducting a case study.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The
preliminaries and the problem formulation are given in §2.
The details of each module in our proposed KG-RAG4SM
method are introduced in §3. Then, experimental evaluation
and the case study are conducted in §4, and the related work
is summarized in §5. Finally, the conclusion and the future
work are stated and discussed in §6.
2 P RELIMINARIES AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
We first discuss preliminaries and then state our problem.
2.1 Preliminaries
We start with preliminaries on LLMs and schema matching,
subgraph retrieval, and knowledge graph-based retrieval-
augmented generation for schema matching. Table 1
presents the frequently-used notations in this work.
2.1.1 LLMs as a Schema Matcher
Schema matching aims to reconcile the semantic ambiguity
between source and target schema by establishing semantic
correspondences between source and target schema. For a
source database schema Sswith a set of tables Tsand a
set of attributes As, target database schema Stwith a set of
tables Ttand a set of attributes At, the schema matching task
is mainly to find a correspondence between (As, Ts)∈Ss
and(At, Tt)∈St. The attribute correspondence betweenTABLE 1
Frequently-Used Notations.
Notation Description
KG,G, P, P′The large knowledge graph and its subgraph,
paths, refined and ranked paths
< h, r, t > The triple is composed of head entity h, relation
r, and tail entity t.
R, E The retrieved list of the entities and relations
from large-size KG
Ss,St The source schema and target schema
Ts,Tt The tables of source schema and target schema
As,At The attributes of source schema and target
schema
Cs,t The attribute correspondence between source
and target schema
θ The schema matching task is modeled with the
binary classification
q, a,A The query or question that is fed to LLMs to
generate the answers aand answer set A
the source schema and target schema is defined as Cs,t=
(cs, ct), where csandctdenote the attribute in the source
schema and target schema, respectively.
Therefore, the schema-matching problem could be
treated as a classification problem to learn a binary classifier
θand the model can determine whether two attributes from
the source and target schema can be matched or not. In
the paradigm of LLMs as a schema matcher, the matching
prompt and question are designed to convert the schema
matching to a binary question-answering (QA) task θ:
LLM (θ) ={(cs, ct)|(cs, ct)∈Cs,t} → { Yes, No }
(cs, ct)∈Cs,tis a corresponding attribute matching pair.
2.1.2 Graph RAG
Graph retrieval augmented generation (Graph RAG) [24]
usually retrieves the knowledge from graphs to enhance the
capability of LLMs to generate the answers for the given
task. Due to the context poisoning of LLMs, the large-scale
graphs are not technically suitable for augmenting LLMs
directly. Subgraph retrieval or path selection [25] aims to
retrieve the relevant subgraph or path from the large graph
based on vector similarity and ranking.
Given a question q, a set of answers Agenerated by
LLMs, and a large-size graph Gthat is employed to augment
the LLMs to generate the optimal answer a∗:
a∗= arg max
a∈Ap(a|q, G)
where p(a|q, G)is modeled as the probability distribution
with the subgraph retriever pα(G|q, G)and answer gener-
atorpβ(a|q,G),αandβare learnable parameters, respec-
tively. Subgraph retriever aims to find the top- Ksubgraphs
G ⊂Gor paths Pthat are relevant and helpful for LLMs to
answer the question q.
2.2 Problem Statement
We formally define the problem of knowledge graph-based
retrieval-augmented generation for schema matching.
Given a large language model (LLM), an external and
large-size knowledge graph KG, retrieved subgraph G, and

--- PAGE 4 ---
4
a schema matching task θ, formally, the KG-RAG4SM is a
transformation F:
LLM′:=F(LLM,G)s.t.aLLM′(θ)> a LLM (θ)
where LLM′denotes the LLMs augmented with the re-
trieved subgraph G(G ⊂ KG ) from large-size KG. The
constraint aLLM′(θ)> a LLM (θ)formally describes that the
correctness of the generated answers for schema matching
by LLMs augmented with retrieved subgraphs are better
than the answers generated by LLMs without retrieved
subgraph from KG for schema matching.
In our KG-RAG4SM , the KG-RAG is introduced to
augment the generation phase of LLMs for complex tasks by
integrating vector-based, graph traversal-based, and query-
based retrievals to retrieve the relevant subgraphs from
large KGs. Technically, KG-RAG augments the question us-
ing the top- Ksubgraphs from KGbased on vector similarity
and dot-product ranking.
3 M ETHODOLOGY
We provide the overview and technical details of the pro-
posed solutions. Our key technical contributions include a
thorough investigation of the novel KG-RAG paradigm for the
schema matching problem by designing efficient subgraph re-
trieval methods via vector-based, query-based, and traversal-based
graph retrievals, as well as a hybrid approach that integrates
them after analyzing their trade-offs, followed by effective ranking
schemes to provide precise knowledge for augmenting the LLMs.
3.1 Leveraging LLM as a Schema Matcher
In the pipeline of leveraging LLM as a schema matcher, a
binary question qfor each matching pair is generated based
on the source attribute name cs, target attribute name ct, and
their textual descriptions from the source schema Ssand
target schema St. Then, the question qis fed to the LLMs for
generating the response, in which the prompts include few-
shot examples with their correct answers and explanations
are constructed to guide LLMs to respond with the correct
answer for schema matching questions.
A prompt including few-shot examples with their correct
answers and explanations is illustrated in Figure 4. In Figure
4, the placeholder {question }will be replaced with the
real questions from the selected dataset. Other placeholders
[d1] and [d2] are descriptions for attribute1 and attribute2,
respectively. Together with Example 2, they are omitted due
to brevity and page limitation.
3.2 Enhancing LLM Prompt with Knowledge Graphs
We empirically find that the attribute names and their
textual descriptions alone are not sufficient in the LLM
schema matching pipeline for complex matching scenarios
that require semantic contextual information. To extract
semantic similarity effectively and efficiently in the form of
relevant subgraphs from external knowledge graphs (KGs),
we develop a number of retrieval methods as described
below. They generally follow three main steps: (1)retrieval
of relevant entities and relations from the KG w.r.t. question;
(2)then identifying relevant subgraphs induced by the
relevant entities from the KG; and finally (3)pruning and
ranking of the relevant subgraphs to provide more precise
semantic contextual information in LLM prompts.
Prompts for LLMs as Schema Mather
You are an expert in schema matching and data integration. Your task is
to analyze attribute 1 with its textual description 1 and attribute 2 with
its textual description 2 from the source and target schema in the given
question, and specify if attribute 1 from the source schema is semantically
matched with attribute 2 from the target schema.
—
Here are two examples of the schema matching questions with correct answers
and explanations that you need to learn before you start to analyze the
potential mappings:
Example 1 : Attribute 1 death-person id and its description 1 [d1] Attribute
2 beneficiary summary-desynpuf id and its description 2 [d2]. Do attribute 1
and atttribute 2 are semantically matched with each other?
Here is the correct answer and the explanations for above given example
question: 1
Explanation : They are semantically matched with each other because
both of them are unique identifiers for each person. Even if the death-
person id refers to the unique identifier of the person in death table and
beneficiary summary-desynpuf id refers to the unique identifier of the person
beneficiary from beneficiary summary table, they are semantically matched
with each other.
Example 2: ...
Remember the following tips when you are analyzing the potential mappings.
Tips : (1) Some letters are extracted from the full names and merged into an
abbreviation word. (2) Schema information sometimes is also added as the
prefix of abbreviation. (3) Please consider the abbreviation case.
—
Based on the above example and tips, please answer the following schema
matching question:
Question: {question }
Please respond only with the label: 1 If attribute 1 and attribute 2 are
semantically matched with each other, otherwise respond with label: 0. Do
not mention that there is not enough information to decide.Fig. 4. Prompts for LLMs as schema matcher.
3.2.1 Retrieving Relevant Entities from the KG
Before retrieving the subgraph from KG, we need to retrieve
the entities from large-size KGs that are relevant to the given
question of schema matching. We follow one of the two
developed paradigms for this purpose.
LLM-based Entity Retrieval. Given a schema matching
question, in this approach we ask an LLM (e.g., GPT-4o-
mini) to retrieve a few relevant entities from the KG. Our
prompts for this purpose including few-shot examples with
their correct answers and explanations are illustrated in
Figure 5. The placeholders {question }are replaced with
the real questions from our selected dataset. Nevertheless,
LLMs can hallucinate, thus it may report some entities that
do not, in fact, exist in the commonsense KG, thus, we need
to verify the retrieved entities by LLMs before retrieving the
subgraphs among these entities. It is worth mentioning that
LLM-based entity retrieval only works well for common-
sense and fact-based KGs (for instance, Wikidata) rather
than domain-specified KGs, since the former KGs or their
open text data forms (e.g., Wikipedia) might have already
been utilized to pre-train the LLMs. As a result, these KGs
are well-known to LLMs, while the domain-specified KGs
may not be well-known to LLMs.
Vector-similarity based Entity Retrieval. This method
leverages vector similarity search to retrieve the relevant en-
tities and relations from KG that are relevant to the schema
matching questions. By representing both the questions and
the knowledge graph components as dense vector embed-
dings, the vector search techniques are used to identify the
top-Krelevant entities based on efficient computation of
similarity scores. This approach ensures high-quality and
scalable retrieval of knowledge graph components, making

--- PAGE 5 ---
5
Prompts for LLMs as Entity Retriever
You are an expert in named entity recognition. Identify the list of the relevant
entities (preferably some entities on attribute 1 and its description, the others
on attribute 2 and its description) in wikidata that is helpful to answer the
question from the following given text.
Respond with only the list of entities with its value, separated by commas.
If you don’t know the answer or if you can not find any entities in wikidata,
just say null. Do not make anything up.
—
For example: Attribute 1 person-person id and its description 1 the person
domain contains records that uniquely identify each patient in the source
data who is time at-risk to have clinical observations recorded within the
source systems; a unique identifier for each person. Attribute 2 benefi-
ciary summary-desynpuf id and its description 2 beneficiary summary per-
tains to a synthetic medicare beneficiary; beneficiary code. Do attribute 1
and attribute 2 are semantically matched with each other?
The relevant entities in wikidata are: patient, unique identifier, benefi-
ciary.
The response should be a list of entities in the given text, separated by
commas, like this: patient, unique identifier, beneficiary.
—
Question :{question }
Fig. 5. Prompts for LLMs as entity retriever.
it well-suited for applications in schema matching and se-
mantic search.
Offline KG embedding and vector storage. The embeddings
for KG entities and relations are generated in an offline
manner using pre-trained transformer-based language mod-
els such as RoBERTa [26]. These embeddings, along with
associated metadata (e.g., entity or relation identifiers) are
stored in a vector database such as ChromaDB. The storage
process includes indexing within the vector database to
facilitate efficient retrieval of relevant embeddings during
online querying.
Online question embedding. The online component starts
by generating embeddings for each question. In particular,
question embeddings are generated using the same pre-
trained model, RoBERTa, which is specifically designed for
sentence embeddings, [27] because it is good at capturing
the semantic meaning of sentences. This approach works for
all KGs including domain-specific ones, because sentence
transformers, such as RoBERTa, are pre-trained on diverse
datasets, enabling them to capture general semantic patterns
and relationships. By embedding entities and relationships
into a universal vector space, they ensure that semantic
similarity is preserved across domains.
Online vector search. To retrieve the top- Kmost similar
entities and relationships, we employ cosine similarity as
the distance metric. Cosine similarity measures the cosine
of the angle between two vectors, and it is defined as:
Cosine Similarity (A, B) =A·B
∥A∥∥B∥
Here, AandBrepresent the embeddings of the question
and a KG entity or relationship, respectively, ·denotes the
dot product, and ∥∥represents the magnitude of a vector.
Cosine similarity is chosen after extensive experimen-
tation against alternative measures such as Euclidean and
Manhattan distances. Even if Euclidean and Manhattan
distances are effective for capturing absolute differences in
vector space, cosine similarity is superior in our context as it
measures the angular alignment between vectors, disregard-
ing their magnitude. We experimentally observe that cosinesimilarity consistently outperforms other techniques, yield-
ing the highest similarity scores and minimum distances for
the relevant retrieved matches.
Additionally, we use the HNSW (Hierarchical Navigable
Small World) indexes implemented in the vector databases
for efficient vector retrieval [28]. The HNSW index con-
structs a graph-based structure where nodes represent data
points, and edges connect neighboring points based on sim-
ilarity, from which the search starts a high-level entry point
and navigates through progressively denser graph layers,
effectively narrowing down to the most similar neighbors.
These optimizations ensure fast and scalable ANN searches,
even for large datasets, which are necessary for scaling
the system over large knowledge graphs such as Wikidata,
where there are millions of entities and triples.
3.2.2 Retrieving Relevant Subgraphs from the KG
This module aims to retrieve relevant subgraphs, paths, or
triples from large KGs that contain concise knowledge to
augment the generation capability of LLMs for knowledge-
intensive tasks. To fully leverage the rich semantic knowl-
edge of KGs for augmenting the generation of LLMs, we
retrieve relevant subgraphs from large-size KGs by using
one of the following techniques. Among them, LLM-based
subgraph retrieval, vector-based KG triple retrieval, and
query-based subgraph retrieval aim to directly identify
the relevant subgraphs from the KG. Only one approach,
namely BFS-based subgraph retrieval requires relevant enti-
ties retrieved from the previous phase (§3.2.1).
LLM-based Subgraph Retrieval. In this method, we call the
LLMs to directly retrieve the relevant subgraphs or paths
that are relevant and helpful to answer the given question,
without the previous step of identifying relevant entities
at first. The prompts including few-shot examples with
expected responses are demonstrated in Figure 6, which
aims to guide LLMs towards directly retrieving the relevant
subgraphs from large-scale KGs. Similar to previous cases,
there is a placeholder {question }that will be replaced with
the real questions from our selected dataset in Figure 6.
Due to the fact that LLMs hallucinate and LLMs also
may not know the KGs well – especially domain-specific
KGs, the quality of the subgraphs retrieved by LLMs can
often be poor. Similar to the LLM-based entity retrieval,
the quality of the subgraphs retrieved by LLMs largely de-
pended on how much extent LLMs know the KGs. Since the
commonsense and fact-based KGs or their open textual data
forms might have already been utilized to pre-train LLMs,
LLM-based subgraph retrieval works well for commonsense
and fact-based KGs, while it might not work for domain-
specified KGs.
Vector-based KG Triple Retrieval. In this method, we
focus on generating, storing, and retrieving embeddings for
triples in large-scale knowledge graphs to facilitate vector
similarity-based KG triples retrieval. First, the embeddings
for KG entities and relationships are created by processing
their labels and descriptions, fetched through the Wikidata
API. These embeddings are generated using a pre-trained
language model, e.g., RoBERTa. The embeddings are then
normalized to unit vectors to enhance the efficiency of
cosine similarity computations. The embeddings, along with

--- PAGE 6 ---
6
Prompts for LLMs as Subgraph Retriever
You are an expert in relevant subgraph extraction from large wikidata knowl-
edge graphs. Identify the list of the relevant subgraph or path in wikidata
that is helpful to answer the question from the following given text. Respond
with only the list of entities with its values, separated by commas. If you
don’t know the answer or if you can not find any relevant subgraph or path
in wikidata, just say null. Do not make anything up.
—
For example:
Question : Attribute 1 person-person id and its description 1 the person
domain contains records that uniquely identify each patient in the source
data who is time at-risk to have clinical observations recorded within the
source systems; a unique identifier for each person. Attribute 2 benefi-
ciary summary-desynpuf id and its description 2 pertains to a synthetic medi-
care beneficiary; beneficiary code. Do attribute 1 and attribute 2 are seman-
tically matched with each other?
Expected Response: The relevant entities that are relevant to the above
questions in wikidata are: patient(Q181600), unique identifier (Q6545185),
beneficiary (Q2596417). The response should be a list of paths or sub-
graphs between these entities in wikidata, separated by ” |”, like this: patient
(Q181600), subclass of (P279), customer (Q852835) →customer (Q852835),
subclass of (P279), beneficiary (Q2596417).
Remember the following tips when you are analyzing extracting subgraphs
or paths from wikidata knowledge graph.
Tips: (1) Identify the relevant wikidata entities that are relevant and help-
ful to answer the above questions, preferably some entities from attribute
1 and its description, the others from attribute 2 and its description. (2)
Create the entity pair based on identified entities from wikidata knowledge
graph. (3) Seach and find the 2-hops paths or subgraph between these en-
tity pairs from wikidata knowledge graph. (4) Please return the path in the
format of ”entity1 value(entity1 id), relation1 value(relation1-property), en-
tity2 value(entity2 id)→entity2 value(entity2 id), relation2 value(relation2-
property), entity3 value(entity3 id) ” if the path is founded. (5) Please use
the separator ” |” to separate the path if multiple paths are found, like this:
paths1 |paths2 |paths3.
—
Question :{question }
Fig. 6. Prompts for LLMs as subgraph retriever.
Prompts for LLMs to Cypher Query for Subgraph Retrieval
You are a neo4j graph database expert, I will give the following file (relation-
ship type, node label, property key) including the schema information of the
wikidata neo4j graph database.
—
Your task is to learn the schema information of the given database and then
write the Cypher query for the next task.
Please identify the key entities from the following question and find the rel-
evant entity from wikidata graph database, then generate Cypher query to
query the relevant subgraph or path from wikidata that can help answer the
following question:
Question : Attribute 1 person-person id and its description 1 the person
domain contains records that uniquely identify each patient in the source
data who is time at-risk to have clinical observations recorded within the
source systems; a unique identifier for each person. Attribute 2 benefi-
ciary summary-desynpuf id and its description 2 pertain to a synthetic medi-
care beneficiary; beneficiary code. Do attribute 1 and attribute 2 are seman-
tically matched with each other?
Fig. 7. Prompts for LLMs to generate Cypher query for retrieval.
metadata such as entity and relationship identifiers, are
stored in a vector database. KG triples retrieval is performed
by computing cosine similarity between the question em-
bedding and the KG triple embeddings, identifying the top-
Kmost relevant triples.
Query-based Subgraph Retrieval. In this method, we call
LLMs to generate the structured query language to query
the paths or subgraphs from the large-size graph database,
as shown in Figure 7, which is relevant and helpful to
answer the given questions. For instance, we retrieve sub-
graphs from the Wikidata knowledge graph. Initially, we or-
ganize the full-size Wikidata into the Neo4j graph databaseengine by loading the existing structured Wikidata dump1.
Then we attempt to query the relevant subgraph from Neo4j
by using the LLM-generated Cypher query, as shown below.
MATCH p=(start:Entity{id:’Q39631’})-
[*1..2]-(end:Entity{id:’Q23905463’})
RETURN p
MATCH p=shortestPath((physician:Entity
{id:’Q39631’})-[ *1..5]-(sp:Entity{id:
’Q23905463’})) RETURN p
The first Cypher query is created to query the paths starting
with entity Q39631 and ending with entity Q23905463 ,
while the second query finds the shortest path between
entity Q39631 and entity Q23905463 . However, query-
based subgraph retrieval does not work well in practice
because these Cypher queries on large knowledge graphs
are computationally expensive and hence time-consuming.
Alternatively, the official graph query service is available
for some KGs, by which the subgraphs can be retrieved by
using the graph-structured query language. For instance,
we leverage the official Wikdiata query service2to retrieve
the subgraph from Wikidata. In this case, we call LLMs to
generate the SPARQL query for a given question, and then
retrieve the subgraphs or paths.
Ideally, the query-based subgraph retrieval method can
search the subgraphs or paths between entity pairs using
a graph-structured query language. However, this method
may suffer from poor quality and efficiency, which makes
it infeasible in practice. The reasons are twofold: (1)It is
a common phenomenon that we cannot retrieve all neces-
sary subgraphs by using LLM-generated structured queries,
such as Cypher, SPARQL, etc., because the quality of LLM-
generated structured queries is poor; (2)frequent query-
ing of large-size graph databases is a complex and time-
consuming task, especially for querying subgraphs or paths
over the KG including millions of entities and relations.
BFS-based Subgraph Retrieval. After retrieving the rele-
vant entities from large-scale KGs by leveraging either LLM-
based entity retrieval or vector similarity-based entity re-
trieval, we explore the relevant subgraphs induced by these
entities with the Breadth-First-Search (BFS) algorithm. For a
given set of retrieved entities from KG:E={e1, e2, . . . , e n},
we first check the number of the retrieved entities n. We
retrieve the 3-hop neighbors subgraph from knowledge
graphs if there is only one retrieved entity ( n= 1). Other-
wise, we create the entity pairs EP={es, ed}by combining
each entity from the entity list E, in which esis the start
entity and edis the end entity. Then for each entity pair
EP, we retrieve the 3-hop subgraphs between esanded(if
any) by using BFS graph traversal. Based on our empirical
results, the 3-hop search is a trade-off solution between the
number of retrieved subgraphs for subgraph refinement
vs. the time complexity and the quality of the retrieved
subgraphs.
3.2.3 Ranking-based Retrieval Refinement
Our methodology incorporates several ranking schemes
to prioritize and rank the already retrieved paths from a
1. https://thm-graphs.github.io/static-wikidata-dump/
2. https://query.wikidata.org/

--- PAGE 7 ---
7
knowledge graph. These schemes are designed to select
the most relevant paths, ensuring that only the best can-
didates are integrated. This facilitates effective integration
with LLMs by evaluating the retrieved paths based on the
ranking of the relevance and structural significance.
One ranking scheme is frequency-based ranking, which
prioritizes those paths also containing several of the top-
Kretrieved relations (§3.2.1: Vector-similarity based Entity
Retrieval). Recall that the top- Kretrieved relations are
identified based on the similarity scores calculated between
the question embedding and the relation embedding. To
further enhance the relevance of retrieved paths, we employ
a second ranking strategy that normalizes frequency-based
scoring with respect to path length. This normalization
ensures that longer paths, which inherently consist of more
relations, do not disproportionately dominate the rankings.
This strategy ensures that paths are ranked based on both
the presence of relevant relations and structural conciseness.
Additionally, for §3.2.2: Vector-based KG Triple Retrieval,
we directly use the cosine similarity between the question
embedding and the triple embeddings, and rank the re-
trieved triples based on vector similarity.
Based on our ranking scheme, we select the top-1, top-2,
or all retrieved paths/ triples to augment the large language
model. Our experimental results show that using the top-2
or top-1 retrieved paths/ triples is generally more effective
and efficient in terms of LLMs’ retrieval-augmented gener-
ation, compared to using all retrieved paths/ triples.
3.2.4 Enhancing Prompts with Retrieved Subgraphs
After retrieving the relevant subgraphs from external KGs,
we leverage them as the semantic knowledge context to
enhance the prompts of LLMs for augmenting the gener-
ation of the final responses for schema matching tasks. To
make LLMs fully understand the retrieved subgraph, there
is an option to convert the retrieved subgraph to the full
text by introducing the verbalizer [29]. Namely, the LLMs
can be the verbalizer, in which case the retrieved subgraphs
will be converted to text by calling LLMs again. However,
this option is not necessary and not the optimal solution
either, since the precondition of calling LLMs to convert the
subgraphs to text is that the LLMs can fully understand
it. Besides, some structured knowledge of the retrieved
subgraphs will be lost during the conversion from triples
to text.
In our case, each retrieved subgraph is a semi-structured
text with some special characters, such as the arrows and
operators, to represent multi-hop relations and separate
multiple paths, which still can be understood and fully
leveraged by LLMs. We feed the retrieved subgraphs within
the prompts to LLMs directly and highlight the roles of the
provided KG context with few-shot examples. The prompts
including the few-shot examples and the retrieved sub-
graphs from KGs as the context to guide and augment LLMs
in making the correct decisions are demonstrated in Figure
8.
As shown in Figure 8, we provide the examples with the
explanations to guide LLMs to fully leverage the provided
KG context when making decisions and generating final
answers for schema matching questions in our given exam-
ples. There are two placeholders {question }and{paths}
Prompts for Augmenting Geneartion with the Retrieved Subgraph
You are an expert in schema matching and data integration. Your task is to
analyze the attribute 1 with its textual description 1 and attribute 2 with its
textual description 2 from source and target schema in the given question,
and specify if the attribute 1 from source schema is semantically matched
with attribute 2 from the target schema. In some question, there is the
knowledge graph context that might be helpful for you to answer.
In this case, you will need to consider the provided context to make
the correct decision.
—
Here are two examples of the question:
Example 1 : Attribute 1 death-person id and its description 1 [d1] Attribute
2 beneficiarysummary-desynpuf id and its description 2 [d2] Do attribute 1
and atttribute 2 are semantically matched with each other?
Here is the knowledge graph context that might be helpful for you to
answer the above schema matching question: death (Q4), has part(s) of the
class (P2670), date of death (Q18748141) →date of death (Q18748141),
opposite of (P461), date of birth (Q2389905) |human (Q5), has characteris-
tic (P1552), age of a person (Q185836) →age of a person (Q185836), uses
(P2283), date of birth (Q2389905)
Here is the correct answer and the explanations for the above given example
question: 0
Explanation : they are not semantically matched with each other, because
death-person id is a unique identifier for each person in death table and
bene birth dt is the date of birth of person in beneficiarysummary table.
From the above KG context, we can find that the date of death is
the opposite of the date of birth, they are not semantically matched
with each other.
Example 2 :...
Remember the following tips when you are analyzing the potential mappings.
Tips :(1) Some letters are extracted from the full names and merged into an
abbreviation word.(2) Schema information sometimes is also added as the
prefix of abbreviation. (3) Please consider the abbreviation case. (4) Please
consider the knowledge graph context to make the correct decision
when it is provided.
—
Based on the provided example and the following knowledge graph context,
please answer the following schema matching question:
{question }
KGs Conctext :{paths }if paths and paths != [’null’] else ”No available
knowledge graph context, please make the decision ownself.”
—
Please respond only with the label: 1 If attribute 1 and attribute 2 are
semantically matched with each other, otherwise respond label: 0. Do not
mention that there is not enough information to decide.Fig. 8. Prompts for augmenting generation of LLMs with the retrieved
subgraph.
that will be replaced with the real questions and the re-
trieved subgraphs from the selected dataset. Other place-
holders [d1] and [d2] are descriptions for attribute1 and
attribute2, respectively. It is worth mentioning that the KG
context given in example 1 within the prompts provides ex-
tra knowledge between the attributes. Namely, the date of
death is the opposite of thedate of birth , which
indicates that date of death anddate of birth are
not semantically equivalent even if it is syntactically similar.
This precise knowledge provides the exact relationships
between two matching attribute pairs, which is helpful for
LLMs to generate the correct answers for the given schema
matching questions and mitigates hallucination.
3.3 KG-RAG4SM
As introduced in §3.2, we have designed multiple knowl-
edge retrieval methods to retrieve the relevant subgraphs
from a large-size KG to augment LLMs for schema match-
ing. There are mainly four pipelines for our KG-RAG4SM
with different choices of knowledge retrieval methods: (1)
Vector-based KG triples retrieval; (2)Vector-based Entity

--- PAGE 8 ---
8
Retrieval + BFS; (3)LLM-based Entity Retrieval + BFS; (4)
LLM-based subgraph retrieval.
We empirically select and provide details of the two best
pipelines for our KG-RAG4SM :(1)Vector-based KG triples
retrieval; (2)Vector-based Entity Retrieval + BFS.
Vector-based KG Triples Retrieval. In this pipeline shown
earlier in Figure 3, the KG triples embeddings and the
question embeddings are created by using the pre-trained
language model. Then, the top- Krelevant KG triples are
retrieved and refined by ranking based on vector similarity.
Vector-based Entity Retrieval + BFS. In this pipeline,
vector-based entity and relations retrieval and BFS graph
traversal are leveraged to retrieve the relevant knowledge
from the large-size knowledge graph KG. Then these re-
trieved and refined knowledge are employed to augment
the LLMs for answering the questions qof the schema
matching θ, the algorithm of this pipeline for our KG-
RAG4SM is demonstrated below.
Algorithm 1 KG-RAG4SM: Vector-based Entity Retrieval
+BFS
1:Input: Question qof schema matching θ,KG, LLMs
2:Output: Answer afor the given questions q
3:Initialize a← ∅,E← ∅,P, P′← ∅,Dmax←3,q,KG
4:E←vector similarity based entity retrieval( q,KG)
5:forei∈Edo
6: if|E|= 0then
7: continue
8: else if |E|= 1then
9: es←ei,ed←NULL
10: EP ← { es, ed}
11: P←BFS(EP,KG,Dmax)
12: else if |E|>1then
13: EP ← combinations (E,2)
14: forepi∈ EP do
15: epi← {esi, eei}
16: P←BFS(epi,KG, Dmax)
17: end for
18: end if
19:end for
20:if|P|>1then
21: R←vector similarity based relation retrieval( q,KG)
22: P′←path refined with ranking( P,R)
23:else
24: P′←P
25:end if
26:a←kg-rag4sm (LLMs , q, P′)
27:return a
As shown in Algorithm 1, the vector-similarity based
entity and relation retrieval is employed to initially retrieve
the relevant entities and relations relevant to the given
questions from large-size KGs (Line 4 and Line 21). Then the
entity pair is created based on the combinations of entities
from the retrieved entity list and retrieves the relevant sub-
graphs or paths from large-size KG by levering 3-hops BFS
(Lines 5-19). To further extract the most relevant subgraphs
from the retrieved ones, the ranking-based subgraphs re-
finement is adopted (Lines 20-25). Eventually, the prompts
enhanced with the refined and retrieved subgraphs are fed
into LLMs to generate the final answer for the given schema
matching questions (Lines 26-27).4 E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We empirically evaluate the performance of the pro-
posed KG-RAG4SM method by comparing against the
state-of-the-art schema matching approaches from two do-
mains: pre-trained language models (PLMs) and large lan-
guage models (LLMs). We conduct experiments using three
widely-used schema matching benchmark datasets and a
self-created dataset from the real-world health informatics
domain. Our code and datasets are available at Github3.
We aim to investigate the following research questions.
•Exp-1: Effectivness. How does our method compare with
the state-of-the-art (SOTA) models for schema matching
in terms of effectiveness?
•Exp-2: Efficiency. How does our method compare with the
SOTA models for schema matching in terms of efficiency?
•Abl-1: Subgraph Retrieval. Which subgraph retrieval
techniques work well for KG-RAG4SM – in terms of
both effectiveness and efficiency – to generate high-quality
results for schema matching?
•Abl-2: Backbone LLMs. Which LLMs perform better in
KG-RAG4SM , e.g., do fewer-parameter LLMs work well
than large-size LLMs for KG-RAG4SM ?
•Case: Hallucinations. How does the KG-RAG4SM mit-
igate the hallucinations of LLMs for complex schema
matching in a real-world scenario?
4.1 Experimental Setup
4.1.1 Datasets
Table 2 presents the statistics of the datasets used in our
experiments. MIMIC4,Synthea5, and CMS6are extracted
from the challenging OMAP schema-level matching bench-
mark [21]. OMAP maps three different healthcare databases
(MIMIC [30], Synthea [31], and CMS [32]) with the OMOP
CDM (Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership Com-
mon Data Model) standard [33]. EMED is our newly created
schema matching benchmark by mapping a dataset from the
e-MedSolution domain to the OMOP CDM model. A brief
introduction of the data models from the source and target
schema is given below.
•MIMIC is a publicly available ICU relational database from
the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center.
•Synthea is an open-source dataset that captures the medi-
cal history of ≈1 million Massachusetts synthetic patients.
•CMS is a set of realistic medicare claims data generated
from medicare claims synthetic public use files (SynPUFs).
•EMED is a dataset constructed by us based on the e-
MedSolution , which is a healthcare information system
(HIS) that has been applied in various healthcare insti-
tutions and medical universities in Hungary.
•OMOP CDM is a standardized and common health-
care data model for analysis of disparate observational
databases that provides a comprehensive view of clinical
and healthcare data for patients and medical staff.
The number of tables and attributes from the source data
models differs from those in the target data model due to
3. https://github.com/machuangtao/KG-RAG4SM
4. https://mimic.mit.edu
5. https://synthea.mitre.org
6. https://github.com/OHDSI/ETL-CMS

--- PAGE 9 ---
9
TABLE 2
Statistics of Dataset for Schema Matching.
Data Model #Tables #Attributes
SourceMIMIC 25 240
Synthea 12 111
CMS 5 96
EMED 54 805
Target OMOP 37 394
Dataset Matching #Matching Pairs #Matched Pairs
MIMIC MIMIC-OMOP 64,080 129
Synthea Synthea-OMOP 29,637 105
CMS CMS-OMOP 25,632 196
EMED EMED-OMAP 81,204 239
structural heterogeneity. The number of matching pairs of
each dataset is the combination of the attributes in each
source data model and the attributes in the target OMOP
CDM data model. The #matched pairs count the number of
positive matchings between the source data model and the
target data model.
It is worth mentioning that there is no splitting of
training, validation, and test datasets for our KG-RAG4SM
technique since it performs schema matching based on the
provided examples and prompts via few-shot learning, and
without any re-training of the backbone LLMs. For the other
SOTA models, such as Unicorn [11] and SMAT [21], which
learn schema matching following a supervised learning
paradigm, each dataset is split into training, validation, and
testing sets based on the split ratio of 0.70, 0.15, and 0.15.
4.1.2 Knowledge Graph
The Wikidata7knowledge graph is selected as the external
knowledge graph to enhance schema matching, since Wiki-
data contains general and common knowledge in the form
of structured data to support Wikipedia. Table 3 provides
the statistics of the Wikidata and Wikidata5M [34].
•Wikidata dumps8is a full-size Wikidata containing
all Wikidata entities in a single JSON or RDF dump.
The Wikidata dumps can be accessed using Wikidata
API9, which allows access to the specific data from the
Wikidata dump by making HTTP requests.
•Wikidata5M10is the core subgraph of Wikidata, con-
taining high-frequency entities from Wikidata with
their corresponding relations and triplets.
We leverage Wikidata dumps with its API to search for
the correct label and value of Wikidata entity and relations
in case of the missed label returned by LLM-based entity
retrieval. We use KG triplets of Wikidata5M to train the
embeddings for the vector-based KG triple retrieval.
4.1.3 SOTA Models
We compare the performance of KG-RAG4SM against two
categories of SOTA schema matching models: (1) PLMs ,
such as, SMAT [21] and Unicorn [11]; (2) LLMs , for exam-
ple, Jellyfish [6]; more details are given below.
7. https://www.wikidata.org
8. https://dumps.wikimedia.org/
9. https://www.wikidata.org/w/api.php
10. https://deepgraphlearning.github.io/project/wikidata5mTABLE 3
Statistics of Wikidat-based KG triple a Knowledge Graphs.
KGs #Entity #Relation #Triplet
Wikidata 4,232,253,847 38,867 1,693,668,039
Wikidata5M 4,594,485 822 20,624,575
•SMAT employs attention over attention (AOA) [35] mech-
anism and BiLSTM networks to model the correlation
between the attribute name and its description to ob-
tain a better sentence representation and subsequently
improved schema matching.
•Unicorn is a unified multi-tasking model for supporting
several matching tasks in data integration, in which the
pre-trained language models and the Mixture-of-Experts
(MoE) modules are introduced to encode and map various
matching tasks for knowledge sharing.
•Jellyfish adopts an instruction-tuning LLM for data pre-
processing that enables the optional knowledge injection
during inference by instruction tuning with reasoning
based on the domain knowledge.
Although there are some other recent methods11, such as
ReMatch [9], and Matchmark [36], they leverage traditional
RAG over LLMs to address schema matching – they only
augment LLMs by retrieving the relevant knowledge from
the unstructured textual documents that reside within the
schema. KcMF [37] retrieves the knowledge from the self-
built knowledge set, while our method retrieves the knowl-
edge from large-size commonsense KG. These methods are
not selected for comparison due to inaccessible source code
and the difference in retrieval augmentation. Our methods
differ from the above methods, we retrieve the relevant
subgraphs from the large-size commonsense and fact-based
KG in the real-world scenario that is external knowledge
compared to the textual documents constructed based on
the descriptions of the database table and attribute.
4.1.4 Evaluation Metrics
Considering that the schema matching is treated as a clas-
sification task in our case, Precision(P) ,Recall(R) ,
andF1-Score are selected to evaluate the performance
of the proposed and competing methods. The precision
measures the proportion of true positive ( TP) matches over
all returned matches (i.e, True Positive (TP) +False
Positive (FP) ), while the recall(R) measures the pro-
portion of true positive matches over all positive matches
(i.e,True Positive (TP) +False Negative (FN) ).
F1-Score is a balance between precision and recall.
P=TP
TP+FPR=TP
TP+FNF1= 2·P·R
P+R
We also evaluate the efficiency of the subgraph retrieval
and answer generation. The retrieval time measures the time
of various subgraph retrieval methods, for instance, vector-
based entity retrieval, BFS, subgraph ranking and refine-
ment, while the generation time measures the generation
11.ReMatch [9],Matchmark [36], and KcMF [37] are not published
at peer-reviewed venues at the time of this submission.

--- PAGE 10 ---
10
times of LLMs to making their decisions and generating the
final answer for the given schema matching questions.
4.1.5 Implementation
The details of the KG-RAG4SM implementations and the
hyperparameters are given as follows.
System. We run the models on the remote server having
Ubuntu 22.04, 60 ×Intel(R) Xeon (Icelake) CPUs @2.8GHz,
2×NVIDIA A10 GPUs with Cuda, 100GB RAM, and
1024GB HDD. We install and manage the PyTorch and its
dependency packages by using Anaconda12.
Backbone LLMs . The GPT-4o-mini from OpenAI is
mainly selected as the backbone LLM in our effectiveness
and efficiency experiments. We utilize the GPT model using
the official API13from OpenAI and load the Mistral14and
Jellyfish15model from huggingface.
Vector Representations. The sentence transformers
framework16is leveraged to derive the vector representa-
tions of the given schema matching questions. Similarly,
entities, relations, and triples from the selected knowledge
graphs are used to obtain their vector representations with
the same embedding model and vector dimensions and then
organized with the chormaDB embedding database17.
Vector-simialrity based Retrieval. The cosine distance
between each question vector and entity, relation, and triple
vector from the KG is calculated and ranked with respect
to the given schema-matching question to retrieve the rele-
vant entities, relations, and triples from the KG. ChromaDB
is employed to implement efficient vector search since it
leverages optimized vector indexing techniques to speed up
similarity searches significantly.
Ranking-based Subgraph Refinement. The top- 1and
top-2most relevant subgraphs are refined by our ranking
scheme (§3.2.3).
Hyperparameters. To make a fair evaluation, the com-
mon hyperparameters across different models are set to the
same values as shown in Table 4.
TABLE 4
The Value of the Common Hyperparameters.
Parameter Name Description Value
max new tokens The max size of the input tokens. 4096
temperature The entropy size of LLMs to control the
tradeoff between predictability and cre-
ativity of the generation and response.0.6
top-k It is a parameter that limits the number
of tokens returned by LLMs.1
top-p It is a parameter that selects the smallest
set of tokens whose cumulative proba-
bility meets or exceeds the probability
p.0.9
embed dim The dimension of the text vector space. 300
batch size The size of the batch data for each itera-
tion.32
Notice that both the dimension of the text vector space
and the dimension of the hidden layers are 300, which
should be consistent with each other.
12. https://anaconda.org/anaconda
13. https://platform.openai.com/
14. https://huggingface.co/mistralai
15. https://huggingface.co/NECOUDBFM
16. https://huggingface.co/sentence-transformers
17. https://github.com/chroma-core/chroma4.2 Effectiveness and Efficiency Results
This section reports the experimental evaluation results
based on selected datasets and competing models and in-
vestigates the aforementioned research questions.
4.2.1 Exp-1: Effectivness
Research Question: How does our method compare with the state-
of-the-art (SOTA) models for schema matching in terms of effec-
tiveness?
Evaluating KG-RAG4SM. We implement the KG-RAG4SM
with the following setting: (1) Backbone LLM : GPT-4o-
mini and Jellyfish-8B are selected as the backbone LLM. (2)
Subgraph Retrieval: Subgraphs retrieved by vector-based
KG triples retrieval with the refined top-2 paths. We keep
the same hyperparameters (Table 4) and prompts in KG-
RAG4SM ,Jellyfish , and GPT-4o-mini .
Evaluating other Models. We have reproduced the results of
SOTA models based on their implementation with the
same common hyperparameters. We report our reproduced
results of SMAT and Unicorn , in which the Glove and
DeBERTa [38] are selected as the encoder for SMAT and
Unicorn respectively. We train the SMAT and Unicorn on
our selected datasets keeping the same max. input text
length and max. number of epochs with their original
hyperparameters, respectively. Namely, the max. input text
length and max. number of epochs for Unicorn are 128 and
10, while they are 240 and 10 for SMAT , respectively. For
Unicorn , we also fine-tune the pre-trained UnicornPlus18
model on our selected datasets. For Jellyfish , we load their
fine-tuned LLMs from huggingface19to generate the results
of schema matching on our datasets.
Results Analysis. We first evaluate and report the effective-
ness of our KG-RAG4SM model compared to the selected
LLMs, i.e., GPT-4o-mini, Jellyfish-8B , across datasets. The
overall comparison results are reported in Table 5, where the
best ones are highlighted with bold values.
TABLE 5
Effectiveness of KG-RAG4SM with top-2 ranked subgraphs by using
vector-based KG triples retrieval, comparison to LLM models.
DatasetMetric
(%)KG-RAG4SM LLM
GPT-
4o-miniJellyfish-
8BGPT-
4o-miniJellyfish-
8B
MIMICP 6.25 9.52 6.25 6.81
R 33.33 66.66 33.33 100
F1 10.52 16.66 10.52 12.76
SyntheaP 20.00 26.31 15.00 10.52
R 36.36 45.45 27.27 36.36
F1 25.80 33.33 19.35 16.32
CMSP 52.38 23.33 44.44 30.00
R 44.00 28.00 48.00 36.00
F1 47.82 25.45 46.15 32.72
EMEDP 3.03 0 2.98 0
R 50.00 0 50.00 0
F1 5.71 0 5.63 0
Our KG-RAG4SM method overall outperforms the se-
lected LLM competing models in terms of both Pand
18. https://huggingface.co/RUC-DataLab/unicorn-plus-v1
19. https://huggingface.co/NECOUDBFM/Jellyfish-8B

--- PAGE 11 ---
11
F1-Score across the datasets. Notably, KG-RAG4SM con-
tributes 35.89% and 30.5% improvement in PandF1-Score
onMIMC ,150% and 25% improvement on Synthea with
Jellyfish-8B as the backbone LLM. Our KG-RAG4SM
also achieves 17.86% and 3.61% improvement of Pand
F1-Score onCMS ,1.67% and 1.42% improvement on
EMED with GPT-4o-mini as the backbone LLM.
Even if the KG-RAG4SM does not yield improvement
inRonMIMIC and CMS dataset, we notice that 66.66%
Rcould be better than 100% Rin practice, since 100%
Rseems overfitting with no false negative and relatively
higher false positive, indicating that the baseline Jellyfish
LLM is more prone to say ‘YES’ than ‘NO’ irrespective of
specific schema matching questions. We observe that our
F1-Score is always higher.
It is worth mentioning that Jellyfish reports 0 across
the metrics on EMED , the reasons are twofold: (1)The
Jellyfish is a fine-tuned LLM model, especially for data
preprocessing tasks, which is easy to underfit for the specific
schema matching tasks; (2)the imbalance of the ground-
truth answers for schema matching in EMED dataset. The
overall results suggest that KG-RAG4SM is a more effec-
tive method augmented with retrieved knowledge from
the large KG than the baseline LLMs without knowledge
augmentation for schema matching.
Next, we evaluate and report the effectiveness of our
KG-RAG4SM compared to the selected PLMs, i.e., Unicorn
and SMAT . The overall comparison results are reported in
Table 6, where the best one is highlighted with bold values.
TABLE 6
Effectiveness of KG-RAG4SM with top-2 ranked subgraphs by using
vector-based KG triples retrieval, compared to PLM models.
DatasetMetric
(%)KG-
RAG4SMUnicorn SMAT
Trained Fine-tuned Trained
MIMICP 6.25 0.04 0 0
R 33.33 99.99 0 0
F1 10.52 0.09 0 0
SyntheaP 20.00 0.46 0 11.82
R 36.36 99.99 0 100
F1 25.80 0.09 0 21.15
CMSP 52.38 0.04 59.99 31.57
R 44.00 99.99 35.99 48.00
F1 47.82 0.09 44.99 38.09
EMEDP 3.03 0.04 0.98 1.25
R 50.00 99.99 24.99 100
F1 5.71 0.09 1.88 2.46
Our method outperforms Unicorn both for trained and
fine-tuned models and SMAT in terms of PandF1-score
onMIMIC ,Synthea ,EMED dataset. For instance, KG-
RAG4SM with GPT-4o-mini outperforms the pre-trained
SMAT by69.20% and 21.97% in terms of PandF1 score
on the Synthea dataset, respectively. Notably, even though
our results are not competitive to the pre-trained Unicorn
and SMAT model in terms of R, the model with 100% and
99.99% tends to be overfitted. As we mentioned before, the
PandF1-score are two crucial metrics for our schema
matching case. Additionally, the results of the fine-tuned
Unicorn model in MIMC and Synthea are 0 since there
are no true positive results obtained by this model, whichfurther verifies the previous conclusion: These models eas-
ily tend to be overfitted. This suggests that our method
achieves the best results in terms of PandF1-score across
datasets. It is also worth mentioning that these PLM-based
models need supervised learning, in which the labeled
data and powerful computational resources are required for
training. Our KG-RAG4SM differs from PLM-based meth-
ods since labeled data and supervised training processes are
not required in our method. Overall, the results from Table 5
and Table 6 demonstrate the effectiveness of our method
compared to the SOTA LLMs and PLM models.
4.2.2 Exp-2: Efficiency
Research Question: How does our method compare with the SOTA
models for schema matching in terms of efficiency?
Evaluation Setting. We measure the average question embed-
ding time, retrieval time, and generation time per question
for our KG-RAG4SM , as well as the average generation
time per question for LLM-based methods. We also present
the total fine-tuning time and training time for PLM-based
methods, i.e., Unicorn and SMAT . It is worth mentioning
that the generation time of PLM-based methods is much
faster, for instance, the final answers of SMAT are generated
within 3 seconds on EMED dataset. This is due to the fact
that the number of parameters of PLM-based models is less
than LLMs even with billions of parameters.
Results Analysis. The efficiency comparison results are given
in Table 7, from which we observe that our method is more
efficient than pre-trained SMAT and pre-trained and fine-
tuned Unicorn even if our method introduces the knowl-
edge retrieval. Interestingly, the generation time of our
method is slightly lower than the generation time of the
same LLM model without RAG, the reason might be that the
retrieved relevant subgraphs within KG-RAG4SM can help
LLMs to locate the required knowledge easily rather than
searching the knowledge from its entire parameter space,
and this further reduces the number of inference for LLMs to
generate the confident response. This also indicates that our
method with the retrieved subgraphs augmentation would
not induce extra time cost for generation. The results indi-
cate that the main time cost of our KG-RAG4SM method
is due to vector retrieval, while the time cost of question
embedding is very low. In contrast to PLM-based models,
ourKG-RAG4SM method performs offline embeddings of
KG entities, relations, and triples, which are independent
of the schema matching task. Therefore, labeled data and
tedious supervised training are not needed for our KG-
RAG4SM . Hence, we report the time of offline KG embed-
dings separately here, which takes 20 hours and 26 hours
for offline embeddings of Wikidata5M entities and triples,
respectively, using our system setup.
4.3 Ablation Study and Analysis
To understand the contributions of each module in our pro-
posed KG-RAG4SM method, we examine the effectiveness
and contributions of each module in the ablation study.
4.3.1 Abl-1: Subgraph Retrieval
Research Question: Which subgraph retrieval techniques work
well for KG-RAG4SM – in terms of both effectiveness and
efficiency – to generate high-quality results for schema matching?

--- PAGE 12 ---
12
TABLE 7
Efficiency of KG-RAG4SM with top-2 ranked subgraphs using vector-based KG triples retrieval, compared to SOTA models.
DatasetKG-RAG LLMs PLMs
KG-RAG4SM (GPT-4o-mini) Jellyfish-8BGPT
4o-miniUnicorn SMAT
Question
Embedding
Time (Sec)Retrieval
Time (Sec)Generation
Time (Sec)Generation
Time (Sec)Generation
Time (Sec)Fine-tuning
Time (Sec)Training
Time (Sec)Training
Time (Sec)
MIMIC 0.01 2.60 0.64 0.26 0.77 3389.90 1267.10 3064.62
Synthea 0.04 2.59 0.51 0.26 0.60 2039.59 1275.27 1404.00
CMS 0.04 2.89 0.58 0.25 0.59 1766.67 1269.63 1399.92
EMED 0.05 2.55 0.61 0.21 0.67 3526.78 1272.33 7890.48
Evaluation Setting. We evaluate the performance of KG-
RAG4SM with the retrieved subgraphs from different sub-
graph retrieval and refinement techniques. (1) Vector-based
retrieval. The full retrieved subgraphs (without ranking),
and ranked top- 1and top- 2subgraphs based on our ranking
scheme. (2) LLM-based retrieval. There are two specific
LLM-based subgraph retrieval methods: LLM-based entity
retrieval combined with BFS-based graph traversal and
LLM-based subgraph retrieval.
TABLE 8
Effectiveness of KG-RAG4SM with GPT -4o-mini as the backbone LLM
and different retrieved subgraphs on CMS dataset.
MetricVector-based Retrieval LLMs-based Retrieval
KG Triples
RetrievalEntity
Retrieval+BFSEntity
Retrieval+BFSSubgraph
Retrieval
P 55.55 47.05 57.14 44.44
R 20.00 32.00 48.00 48.00
F1 29.41 38.09 52.17 46.15
Results Analysis. The results are given in Table 8, from which
we find that the KG-RAG4SM with the subgraph retrieved
using vector-based KG triples retrieval achieves 55.55% P
while with the subgraph retrieved using vector-based entity
retrieval+BFS achieves 47.05% P. We also observe that the
KG-RAG4SM with the subgraph retrieved by using LLMs-
based entity retrieval+BFS achieves 57.14% Pwhile with the
subgraph retrieved by using LLMs-based subgraph retrieval
achieves 44.44% P. This suggests that KG-RAG4SM with
GPT-4o-mini as the backbone LLM and with the subgraph
retrieved by using vector-based KG triples retrieval outper-
forms the vector-based entity retrieval + BFS in terms of
Pon the CMS dataset. Similarly, KG-RAG4SM with the
subgraph retrieved by using LLM-based entity retrieval +
BFS outperforms LLM-based subgraph retrieval in terms
ofPon the CMS dataset. In terms of the efficiency of the
subgraph retrieval, the average number of the retrieved
paths per question for these subgraph retrieval strategies
on the CMS dataset are shown in Figure 9. We observe that
the average number of the retrieved subgraphs per question
is 7 and 4.7 by using vector-based KG triples retrieval and
vector-based entity retrieval+BFS, while it is 3.13 and 1.07
by using LLMs-based entity retrieval+BFS and LLMs-based
subgraph retrieval. This suggests that the vector-based re-
trieval is able to retrieve more subgraphs than LLMs-based
retrieval because LLMs may have limited reasoning and un-
Vector-based KG
Triples RetrievalVector-based Entity
Retrieval + BFSLLMs-based Entity
Retrieval + BFS LLMs-based
Subgraph Retrieval02468
7
4.7
3.13
1.07Average Number of Path per Question
Retrieval MethodFig. 9. Average number of retrieved subgraphs for different subgraph
retrieval methods on CMS dataset.
derstanding capabilities about the commonsense knowledge
graphs (e.g., Wikidata). As a result, we can not retrieve any
subgraphs for the majority of questions by using the LLMs-
based subgraph retrieval method. The average retrieval
time per question for vector-based KG triples retrieval and
vector-based entity retrieval + BFS is 2.88 seconds and 7.43
seconds, respectively, while the retrieval time per question
for LLMs-based Entity Retrieval + BFS and LLMs-based
subgraph retrieval is 1.40 seconds and 0.66 seconds, re-
spectively. Even though LLMs-based retrieval is faster than
vector-based retrieval, due to the higher number of retrieved
subgraphs, vector-based retrieval is preferred.
TABLE 9
Effectiveness of KG-RAG4SM with GPT -4o-mini as the backbone LLM
and different subgraphs with ranked-based refinement on CMS dataset.
MetricVector-based
KG Triples RetrievalVector-based
Entity Retrieval + BFS
Top-1
RankedTop-2
RankedW/O
RankTop-1
RankedTop-2
RankedW/O
Rank
P 62.50 52.38 55.55 59.09 52.63 47.05
R 40.00 44.00 20.00 52.00 40.00 32.00
F1 48.70 47.82 29.41 55.31 45.45 38.09

--- PAGE 13 ---
13
Next, we evaluate the effectiveness of the ranking-based
subgraph refinement for the vector-based retrieval strategy.
The final results with different ranked subgraphs and the
subgraphs without ranking on the CMS dataset are reported
in Table 9. We observe that the model augmented with
the top-2 ranked subgraphs retrieved by vector-based KG
triples retrieval contribute to 120% and 62.59% improve-
ments on RandF1-score , respectively, compared with
the model without ranking. Meanwhile, the top-1 ranked
subgraphs retrieved by vector-based entity retrieval + BFS
contribute to 25.58%, 62.50%, and 45.20% improvements
onP,R, and F1-score , respectively, compared with the
model without (W/O) ranking. Overall, the results suggest
that the model augmented with ranking-based refinement
outperforms the model augmented without ranking. This is
because our ranking scheme can identify the most relevant
knowledge by removing the irrelevant entities, relations,
and KG triples from the retrieved subgraphs.
4.3.2 Abl-2: Backbone LLMs
Research Question: Which LLMs perform better in KG-
RAG4SM , e.g., do fewer-parameter LLMs work well than large-
size LLMs for KG-RAG4SM ?
Evaluation Setting. We evaluate the performance of KG-
RAG4SM with the mainstream backbone LLMs varying
from small to large sizes. GPT-4o-mini, GPT-4o, and Mistral-
7B-Instruct-v0.3 from OPENAI and MistralAI are selected.
The fine-tuned models, such as Jellyfish-7B and Jellyfish-
8B, are also considered as backbone LLMs from [6]. These
models are fine-tuned based on Llama-3-8B-Instruct and
Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.2, respectively, by using a subset of
instruction data for error detection, data imputation, schema
matching, and entity matching. We report the results of our
proposed KG-RAG4SM on the CMS dataset with the top- 2
ranked subgraphs retrieved via the vector-based KG triples
retrieval method in Table 10.
TABLE 10
Results of KG-RAG4SM with different backbone LLMs on CMS
dataset.
MetricGPT Jellyfish Mistral
4o-mini 4o 8B 7B 7B
P 52.38 34.78 23.33 66.66 26.66
R 44.00 32.00 28.00 16.00 64.00
F1 47.82 33.33 30.43 25.45 37.64
Time (Sec) 0.58 0.72 0.39 0.64 5.62
Results Analysis. We find that KG-RAG4SM with GPT-4o-
mini as the backbone LLM attains 52.38% , 44.00%, and
47.82% P,R, and F1-score , respectively; while with GPT-
4o as the backbone LLM it achieves 34.78%, 32.00%, and
33.33% P,R, and F1-score , respectively. In terms of gener-
ation times, KG-RAG4SM with GPT-4o-mini is faster than
that with GPT-4o. This indicates that KG-RAG4SM works
better with GPT-4o-mini than with GPT-4o. More generally,
KG-RAG4SM with small-size LLMs works better than with
large-size ones. This is due to the fact that frequent knowl-
edge conflicts might occur between the retrieved knowledge
and the internal knowledge of large-size LLMs. We also
observe that KG-RAG4SM with Jellyfish-7B as the back-
bone LLM achieves 66.66% Pin 0.64 seconds per question,while with the Mistral-7B-Instruct-v0.3 it attains 26.66% P
in 5.62 seconds per question. This suggests the effectiveness
of instructions-based fine-tuning Jellyfish in KG-RAG4SM
since Jellyfish-7B is a fine-tuned model based on Mistral-7B-
Instruct-v0.3. Overall, we find that the choice of backbone
LLMs is crucial for KG-RAG4SM , where the small-size
LLMs work better than large-size ones.
4.4 Case Study
A case study is conducted to further verify the hallucination
mitigation of our KG-RAG4SM method on the complex
schema matching case from the real-world scenario.
4.4.1 Case Introduction
We select schema matching tasks in a real-world scenario
by mapping the data tables from the e-MedSolution clinical
module into the OMOP CDM data model. e-MedSolution20
is an integrated healthcare information system (HIS) that
has been deployed and applied in several healthcare insti-
tutions and medical universities in Hungary. The clinical
module of e-MedSolution is selected to map into the OMOP
CDM clinical data model since the concise schema is the core
and representative module of the e-MedSolution system
and OMOP CDM is a standardized healthcare data model
[4]. Thereby, a new schema-level schema matching dataset
EMED is created by referring to the format of OMAP dataset.
It is worth mentioning that only the schema-level data, i.e.,
entity, attributes, and constraints, of the e-MedSolution are
accessed when creating the EMED dataset. Table 11 gives an
example data of the EMED dataset.
As shown in Table 11, description 1 gives a brief sum-
mary of the attribute name in OMOP CDM, and description
2 provides a brief summary of the attribute name in e-
MedSolution. Additionally, an assigned label indicates the
potential matching pairs, more precisely, label 1 indicates
the matched attribute pair and label 0 indicates the un-
matched attribute pair.
4.4.2 Case: Hallucinations
To illustrate hallucination mitigation of KG-RAG4SM ver-
sus LLM-based schema matching, we conduct the case
study to demonstrate the roles of the retrieved subgraph
Gfrom the large-scale KG.
Evaluation Setting. We set up the case study with the fol-
lowing subgraph retrieval and backbone LLMs. (1)Sub-
graph retrieval: the refined top- 1subgraphs by using vector-
based KG triples retrieval. (2)Backbone LLMs: GPT-4o-
mini. To highlight the hallucinations mitigation of our KG-
RAG4SM , we ask the LLM to return the results for the given
schema-matching questions and provide explanations.
Case Verification. The two schema matching cases are se-
lected from the EMED dataset. Figure 10 demonstrates
the responses of KG-RAG4SM model and its correctness
compared with ground-truth answers by highlighting how
KG-RAG4SM mitigate the hallucinations with the retrieved
subgraphs from large-scale KG. The"and#indicate the
correctness of the responses compared to ground truth.
Result Analysis. In the first case, the response of LLM
is1indicating the given attributes are semantically
20. https://www.eszfk.hu/e-medsolution

--- PAGE 14 ---
14
TABLE 11
The example data of the EMED dataset.
OMOP CDM e-MedSolution Description 1 Description 2 Label
person-person id hun user-
external idThe person domain contains records
that uniquely identify each patient in
the source data who is at time at-risk
to have clinical observations recorded
within the source systems.; a unique
identifier for each person.The hun user table records the basic
data of the various users including the
doctor.; An external identifier of the
user.1
specimen-
specimen source idhun drug text-
drug idThe specimen domain contains the
records identifying biological samples
from a person.; the specimen identifier
as it appears in the source data.The hun drug text table records the
textual description of the drug.; The in-
ternal identifier of the drug.; It refers to
drug id in the hun drug table recording
the textual description of the drug.0
Case 1
Question :A t t r i b u t e 1 measurement-measurement time and its de-
scription 1 the measurement table contains records of measurement, i.e.
structured values (numerical or categorical) obtained through systematic
and standardized examination or testing of a person or person’s sample.
the measurement table contains both orders and results of such measure-ments as laboratory tests, vital signs, quantitative ﬁndings from pathol-ogy reports, etc. the time of the measurement. this is present for back-
wards compatibility and will be deprecated in an upcoming version At-
tribute 2 hun
case cinterventions-perfac date and its description 2 The
hun case cinterventions table records the basic intervention data of cured
cases.The date of intervention. Do attribute 1 and attribute 2 are semanti-
cally matched with each other?—
LLM Response: 1 (Yes, they are semantically matched.)
LLM Explanations:
Attribute 1 refers to the time associated with measurements, such as labo-ratory tests, vital signs, and other standardized examinations or testing of a
person or their sample. Attribute 2 refers to the date of interventions recorded
for cured cases. Both attributes represent a temporal aspect (a timestamp or
date) of an event involving a person. While Attribute 1 is broader (covering
measurements), and Attribute 2 is speciﬁc to intervention dates,t h e y
share the semantic meaning of capturing the time when a particular event
related to a person occurred. This temporal aspect makes them seman-
tically matched, as the context aligns their purposes su !ciently.
—
Question :...
Retrieved Subgraphs:
beneﬁciary (Q2596417), subclass of(Q21514624), customer (Q852835) →cus-
tomer (Q852835) , subclass of(Q21514624), patient (Q181600)
KG-RAG4SM Response: 0 (No, they are not semantically matched.)
LLM Explanations: The provided subgraph from the knowledge graph
clariﬁes that a beneﬁciary is a subclass of a customer, which in turn is asubclass of a patient.
Attribute 1 pertains to measurements taken during clinical or standardized
examinations of a patient, emphasizing a healthcare context. Attribute 2
pertains to the date of interventions in the context of cured cases,w h i c h
might involve administrative or operational data related to interventionsrather than clinical measurements. However, there is no explicit mention
of measurements or a direct clinical context for Attribute 2, which implies aseparation in domain focus. Because of this di” erence in domain focus,
these attributes are not semantically matched.Case 2
Question :A t t r i b u t e 1 measurement-measurement idand its descrip-
tion 1 the measurement table contains records of measurement, i.e. struc-
tured values (numerical or categorical) obtained through systematic and stan-
dardized examination or testing of a person or person’s sample. the measure-
ment table contains both orders and results of such measurements as labo-ratory tests, vital signs, quantitative ﬁndings from pathology reports, etc. aunique identiﬁer for each measurement. Attribute 2 hun perform-req no
and its description 2 The hun perform table records the fulﬁllment status ofthe requested order. The reference identiﬁer of the performance. The per-
son domain contains records that uniquely identify each performance. Do
attribute 1 and attribute 2 are semantically matched with each other?
—
LLM Response: 0 (No, they are not semantically matched.)
LLM Explanations:
Attribute 1 is a foreign key identiﬁer referring to the person about whom
the measurement (e.g., lab test or vital sign) was recorded. It speciﬁcally
identiﬁes a person, and their demographic details are stored in the persontable. Attribute 2 is a foreign key identiﬁer referring to the sampling user whoperformed or fulﬁlled the order. It points to the user id in the hun user table,
which identiﬁes the user responsible for the sampling activity. They are
not semantically matched because they refer to distinct roles andconcepts within the data (person vs. user performing an action).
—
Question :...
Retrieved Subgraphs:SA physical status classiﬁcation system (Q297199), instance of (P31), medicalclassiﬁcation (Q3518464)KG-RAG4SM Response: 1 (Yes, they are semantically matched.)
LLM Explanations: The provided subgraph context suggests a connection
to a system for categorizing medical or clinical events, such as measurements,statuses, or procedures.
Attribute 1 is a unique identiﬁer for a measurement, which can be part of a
standardized medical process, such as laboratory results, vital signs, or othertests. Attribute 2 is the reference identiﬁer for the performance or fulﬁllment
status of a requested order. This context suggests that the performance
likely involves medical processes, aligning with measurements or
tests.
Given the medical context implied by the knowledge graph and the overlapin domains of measurement and medical order fulﬁllment, both identiﬁers
reference unique records within a system where medical tests orperformances occur. These attributes can be semantically matched.
Fig. 10. Case study: Hallucinations mitigation of KG-RAG4SM for schema matching. The schema matching question for KG-RAG4SM is not shown,
since it is the same question given to the LLM.
matched, while these attributes are not semantically
matched in both the ground-truth answer and schema
matching in practice since the measurement_time
and hun_case_c_interventions_perfac_date are
different from each other. The reason behind LLM’s
response is that LLM incorrectly thinks that both
attributes represent a temporal aspect of an eventinvolving a person and this temporal aspect makes
them semantically matched. In contrast, KG-RAG4SM ,
augmented with the relevant subgraphs retrieved
from the external KG, responds with the answer 0
indicating that the given attributes are not semantically
matched. This is mainly because of the retrieved
subgraph beneficiary (Q2596417), subclass of

--- PAGE 15 ---
15
(Q21514624), customer (Q852835) →customer
(Q852835), subclass of (Q21514624), patient
(Q181600) clarifies that the hierarchical relationships
among beneficiary ,customer , and patient ,
which helps LLMs to establish the hierarchical domain
relationships of the attributes in the given schema matching
question. Even if the retrieved subgraph does not explicitly
mention measurements or a direct clinical context for
interventions , it implies that there is a separation in
domain focus with different contexts. This strengthens
the conclusion that they are not semantically matched,
thereby, the response of KG-RAG4SM is consistent with
the ground-truth answer.
In the second case, the response of LLM is0while
these attributes are semantically matched in the ground
truth. Interestingly, LLM incorrectly thinks that these two
attributes refer to distinct roles and concepts between
a person and a user performing a medical action. In
contrast, KG-RAG4SM returns the response with the
correct answer 1with the help of the retrieved subgraph
from KG:SA physical status classification
system (Q297199), instance of (P31), medical
classification (Q3518464) . The provided subgraph
suggests a connection to a system for categorizing medical
or clinical events, such as measurements, statuses, or
procedures, and the performance likely involves medical
processes, aligning with measurements or tests. It implicitly
shows the overlap in domains of measurement and medical
order fulfillment, which indicates that both identifiers
reference to unique records within a system where medical
tests or performances occur.
The two case studies demonstrate that the hallucination
issues of LLMs for schema matching are well mitigated by
augmenting the LLMs with the retrieved relevant subgraphs
from large-size knowledge graphs in our KG-RAG4SM .
5 R ELATED WORK
Schema matching is a process of establishing semantic asso-
ciations between different schema, in which the semantic
correspondences between the source schema and target
schema are usually identified [2]. In contrast to schema
matching, schema mapping is a process of generating the
assertions and mappings from the identified semantic cor-
respondence, by which the source schema could be mapped
onto the target schema to provide a common interface for
accessing and querying heterogeneous data [39].
In general, the correspondences between the two
schemas can be identified based on domain experts man-
ually, in which plenty of human effort and experience are
required [40]. In the case of manual mapping, mismatches
and errors are also inevitable, as the intensive and repeated
work might distract humans. To improve the matching
efficiency and to minimize the mismatch, an auto-match
system is designed to support automatic schema matching
based on machine learning [41]. In this method, probability
knowledge is obtained from the domain experts based on
Bayesian learning, which provides an attribute dictionary
to find optimal matching pairs. However, the source of
probability knowledge comes from domain experts, whose
cognitive biases inevitably bring some errors. Consideringthe strengths of similarity-based matching and machine
learning-based matching, a hybrid schema matching model
is proposed by combining the lexical and semantic similarity
with machine learning [42].
To free human hands from the tedious schema matching
task, a new semi-automatic schema matching approach is
proposed [43]. In this approach, the domain ontologies
and sample instances are reused to identify and determine
the semantic correspondences between schema. Similarly,
a schema matching method is proposed to match schema
based on the analysis of attribute values. The external
knowledge, namely, background ontologies, is utilized to
provide the semantic reference based on ontology alignment
[44]. For the sake of improving the matching precision, the
medical knowledge bases from the medical encyclopedia
are utilized to learn better representations of medical con-
cepts and properties, which is conducive to minimizing
the mismatch and errors. In that work, the entity and its
description are concatenated as input, and then it is encoded
and mapped onto vector space based on the pre-trained lan-
guage model. Then a medical schema matching method is
proposed based on the relation alignment between descrip-
tion embedding of an extracted medical entity and learned
heterogenous knowledge graph embedding [45]. However,
these methods follow supervised learning, in which large-
size labeled data are required for model training.
Recently, several schema matching approaches based on
LLMs are proposed to address the above limitations, such as
fine-tuned LLMs, retrieval-enhanced LLMs, and reasoning-
guided LLMs. To improve the performance of LLMs for data
preprocessing, an instruction-tuning LLM [6] is proposed,
which enables the optional knowledge injection during in-
ference by the instruction tuning with reasoning based on
domain knowledge. Since the external knowledge might be
useful to enhance LLMs for schema matching, RAG-based
approaches are proposed to augment LLMs by retriev-
ing the relevant knowledge from text chunks constructed
based on the textual descriptions of table and attributes,
e.g., a retrieval-enhanced large language model for schema
matching [9] that retrieves the top- kdocument from the
textual documents based on semantic relevance. Inspired
by the RAG on LLMs, a compositional language model for
schema matching [36] enhances and refines the results based
on the semantic retrieval from muti-vector documents and
confidence scoring by multiple callings of LLMs. Similarly,
an LLM-based knowledge-compliant schema and entity
matching framework [37] is proposed that guides LLM
reasoning based on pseudo-code-based task decomposition
and knowledge retrieval from domain knowledge sets by
calling LLMs to query the relevant keywords.
To summarize, the prevailing methods of schema match-
ing could be classified into five categories: similarity-based
matching [42], [46], graph-based matching [43], pre-training
language model-based matching [10], [11], [41], [45], LLMs-
based matching [6], and RAG-based matching [9], [36], [37].
Although there are some recent works, such as ReMatch
[9] and Matchmark [36], they leverage the RAG over LLM
to address the schema matching, but only the knowledge
from the textual documents of the descriptions for table and
attribute is retrieved for augmentation. KcMF [37] retrieves
the knowledge from the self-built knowledge set, but the

--- PAGE 16 ---
16
knowledge from the large commonsense and fact-based KGs
in the real world has not been adapted and fully leveraged
to augment the LLMs for schema matching. To some extent,
the aforementioned methods achieve the (semi-) automatic
schema matching and mapping for heterogeneous data in-
tegration, but it is still incapable of resolving the semantic
ambiguities and conflicts in some complex mapping cases
because of the missing evidence and factual knowledge
during the matching.
Deep learning, PLMs, and LLMs for Other Data Inte-
gration Tasks. Besides schema matching and mapping, the
field of data preparation/ integration deals with several
other critical challenges, e.g., data acquisition, extraction,
cleaning, augmentation, transformation, and annotation, en-
tity matching, ontology alignment, and data fusion, among
others [47]–[49]. Recent advances in deep learning and
foundation models have also achieved promising results
on many such tasks. Notable works include deep learning
embedding-based data integration over relational databases
[50], [51] and ontology matching [52], pre-trained language
models (PLMs) for entity matching [53], [54] and col-
umn type annotation [55], large language models (LLMs)-
powered entity resolution [56]–[58] and other data wran-
gling tasks [59], [60], etc. The focus of our work is schema
matching, which is different from the aforementioned prob-
lems. We do not consider cell values (neither rows/ entities)
in a table, instead, we directly aim at finding semantic cor-
respondence among attribute names (i.e., column names) in
tables from source and target schema. Additionally, unlike
ours, none of these works employ external and large-scale
knowledge graph-based retrieval augmentation paradigms
to enhance the LLM’s performance in data integration tasks.
6 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a novel knowledge graph-
based retrieval-augmented generation for schema matching
solution, KG-RAG4M to address the limitations that tradi-
tional similarity-based and LLMs-based schema matching
methods are incapable of resolving semantic ambiguities in
complex mapping cases. Our framework differs from the
emerging graph RAG approaches that retrieve knowledge
from local and small-size graphs built from text chunks.
We proposed several subgraph retrieval methods from
large KGs, followed by ranking-based subgraph refinement.
Our empirical results confirmed that the vector-based KG
triples retrieval and vector-based entity retrieval + BFS
graph traversal methods are the optimal subgraph retrieval
strategies. We conducted extensive experiments, the results
demonstrated that our KG-RAG4SM outperforms PLMs
and LLMs based SOTA methods in terms of effectiveness
and efficiency. Our case studies from the real-world schema
matching scenario showed that the hallucination of LLMs
for schema matching is well mitigated by our method.
In this study, we augmented LLMs with relevant sub-
graphs retrieved from commonsense and fact-based KGs,
while the domain-specified KGs were not fully investigated.
This is an interesting direction for future work. Additionally,
we shall investigate how our KG-RAG paradigm can im-
prove other LLM-based data integration tasks such as entity
matching and data fusion.REFERENCES
[1] D. H. Hai, Schema Matching and Mapping-Based Data Integration:
Architecture, Approaches and Evaluation . VDM Verlag, 2007.
[2] E. Rahm, Towards Large-Scale Schema and Ontology Matching .
Springer, 2011, pp. 3–27.
[3] C. Ma, “Knowledge-enriched Schema Mapping: A Preliminary
Case Study of e-MedSolution System,” E¨ otv¨ os Lor´ and University,
Tech. Rep. , 2020.
[4] G. Jiang, R. C. Kiefer, D. K. Sharma, E. Prud’hommeaux, and
H. R. Solbrig, “A Consensus-based Approach for Harmonizing the
OHDSI Common Data Model with HL7 FHIR,” Studies in Health
Technology and Informatics , vol. 245, p. 887, 2017.
[5] M. Parciak, B. Vandevoort, F. Neven, L. M. Peeters, and S. Van-
summeren, “Schema Matching with Large Language Models: an
Experimental Study,” in TaDA: International Workshop on Tabular
Data Analysis , 2024.
[6] H. Zhang, Y. Dong, C. Xiao, and M. Oyamada, “Jellyfish:
Instruction-Tuning Local Large Language Models for Data Pre-
processing,” in Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) , 2024, pp. 8754–8782.
[7] A. Steiner, R. Peeters, and C. Bizer, “Fine-tuning Large Language
Models for Entity Matching,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.08185 , 2024.
[8] L. Feng, H. Li, and C. J. Zhang, “Cost-Aware Uncertainty Re-
duction in Schema Matching with GPT-4: The Prompt-Matcher
Framework,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.14507 , 2024.
[9] E. Sheetrit, M. Brief, M. Mishaeli, and O. Elisha, “ReMatch: Re-
trieval Enhanced Schema Matching with LLMs,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.01567 , 2024.
[10] Y. Zhang, A. Floratou, J. Cahoon, S. Krishnan, A. C. M ¨uller,
D. Banda, F. Psallidas, and J. M. Patel, “Schema Matching using
Pre-trained Language Models,” in International Conference on Data
Engineering (ICDE) , 2023, pp. 1558–1571.
[11] J. Tu, J. Fan, N. Tang, P . Wang, G. Li, X. Du, X. Jia, and S. Gao, “Uni-
corn: A Unified Multi-tasking Model for Supporting Matching
Tasks in Data Integration,” Proceedings of the ACM on Management
of Data , vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–26, 2023.
[12] J. Zhang, T. Mytkowicz, M. Kaufman, R. Piskac, and S. K. Lahiri,
“Using Pre-trained Language Models to Resolve Textual and
Semantic Merge Conflicts (Experience Paper),” in ACM SIGSOFT
International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis (ISSTA) ,
2022, pp. 77–88.
[13] C. Ma, B. Moln ´ar,´A. Tarcsi, and A. Bencz ´ur, “Knowledge Enriched
Schema Matching Framework for Heterogeneous Data Integra-
tion,” in Information Technology and Data Science (CITDS) , 2022, pp.
183–188.
[14] T. Zhang, Z. Cai, C. Wang, M. Qiu, B. Yang, and X. He, “SMed-
BERT: A Knowledge-Enhanced Pre-trained Language Model with
Structured Semantics for Medical Text Mining,” in Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics and International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers)
(ACL-IJCNLP) , 2021, pp. 5882–5893.
[15] X. Wei, S. Wang, D. Zhang, P . Bhatia, and A. Arnold, “Knowledge
Enhanced Pretrained Language Models: A Compreshensive Sur-
vey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.08455 , 2021.
[16] J. Li, X. Li, L. Hu, Y. Zhang, and J. Wang, “Knowledge Graph En-
hanced Language Models for Sentiment Analysis,” in International
Semantic Web Conference (ISWC) , 2023, pp. 447–464.
[17] D. Shlyk, T. Groza, M. Mesiti, S. Montanelli, and E. Cavalleri,
“REAL: A Retrieval-Augmented Entity Linking Approach for
Biomedical Concept Recognition,” in Workshop on Biomedical Nat-
ural Language Processing , 2024, pp. 380–389.
[18] D. Vrande ˇci´c and M. Kr ¨otzsch, “Wikidata: A Free Collaborative
Knowledgebase,” Communications of the ACM , vol. 57, no. 10, pp.
78–85, 2014.
[19] D. L. Willett, V . Kannan, L. Chu, J. R. Buchanan, F. T. Velasco,
J. D. Clark, J. S. Fish, A. R. Ortuzar, J. E. Youngblood, D. G. Bhat,
and M. A. Basit, “SNOMED CT Concept Hierarchies for Sharing
Definitions of Clinical Conditions Using Electronic Health Record
Data,” Appl Clin Inform. , vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 667–682, 2018.
[20] L. Wei, G. Xiao, and M. Balazinska, “RACOON: An LLM-based
Framework for Retrieval-Augmented Column Type Annotation
with a Knowledge Graph,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.14556 , 2024.
[21] J. Zhang, B. Shin, J. D. Choi, and J. C. Ho, “SMAT: An Attention-
based Deep Learning Solution to the Automation of Schema
Matching,” in European Conference on Advances in Databases and
Information Systems (ADBIS) , 2021, pp. 260–274.

--- PAGE 17 ---
17
[22] Y. Hu, Z. Lei, Z. Zhang, B. Pan, C. Ling, and L. Zhao,
“GRAG: Graph Retrieval-Augmented Generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.16506 , 2024.
[23] B. Sarmah, B. Hall, R. Rao, S. Patel, S. Pasquali, and D. Mehta,
“HybridRAG: Integrating Knowledge Graphs and Vector Re-
trieval Augmented Generation for Efficient Information Extrac-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.04948 , 2024.
[24] B. Peng, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, X. Bo, H. Shi, C. Hong, Y. Zhang, and
S. Tang, “Graph Retrieval-Augmented Generation: A Survey,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08921 , 2024.
[25] H. Liu, S. Wang, Y. Zhu, Y. Dong, and J. Li, “Knowledge Graph-
Enhanced Large Language Models via Path Selection,” in Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2024) , 2024, pp.
6311–6321.
[26] Y. Liu, M. Ott, N. Goyal, J. Du, M. Joshi, D. Chen, O. Levy,
M. Lewis, L. Zettlemoyer, and V . Stoyanov, “RoBERTa: A Ro-
bustly Optimized BERT Pretraining Approach,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1907.11692 , 2019.
[27] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, “Sentence-BERT: Sentence
Embeddings using Siamese BERT-Networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1908.10084 , 2019.
[28] Y. A. Malkov and D. A. Yashunin, “Efficient and Robust Approxi-
mate Nearest Neighbor Search using Hierarchical Navigable Small
World Graphs,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence , vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 824–836, 2018.
[29] Y. Wu, N. Hu, S. Bi, G. Qi, J. Ren, A. Xie, and W. Song, “Retrieve-
Rewrite-Answer: A KG-to-Text Enhanced LLMs Framework for
Knowledge Graph Question Answering,” in International Joint
Conference on Knowledge Graphs (IJCKG) , 2023.
[30] A. E. Johnson, T. J. Pollard, L. Shen, L. wei H. Lehman, M. Feng,
M. Ghassemi, B. Moody, P . Szolovits, L. A. Celi, and R. G. Mark,
“MIMIC-III, A Freely Accessible Critical Care Database,” Scientific
Data , vol. 3, 2016.
[31] J. Walonoski, M. Kramer, J. Nichols, A. Quina, C. Moesel, D. Hall,
C. Duffett, K. Dube, T. Gallagher, and S. McLachlan, “Synthea:
An Approach, Method, and Software Mechanism for Generat-
ing Synthetic Patients and the Synthetic Electronic Health Care
Record,” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association :
JAMIA , vol. 25, no. 7, 2018.
[32] C. G. Lambert and P . Amritansh Kumar, “Transforming the 2.33 M-
patient Medicare synthetic public use files to the OMOP CDMv5:
ETL-CMS software and processed data available and feature-
complete,” https://github.com/OHDSI/ETL-CMS, 2016.
[33] OHDSI, The Book of OHDSI: Observational Health Data Sciences and
Informatics . OHDSI, 2019.
[34] A. Haller, A. Polleres, D. Dobriy, N. Ferranti, and S. J.
Rodr ´ıguez M ´endez, “An Analysis of Links in Wikidata,” in The
Semantic Web: International Conference (ESWC) , 2022, p. 21–38.
[35] Y. Cui, Z. Chen, S. Wei, S. Wang, T. Liu, and G. Hu, “Attention-
over-Attention Neural Networks for Reading Comprehension,”
inAnnual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers) (ACL) , 2017, pp. 593–602.
[36] N. Seedat and M. van der Schaar, “Matchmaker: Self-Improving
Large Language Model Programs for Schema Matching,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.24105 , 2024.
[37] Y. Xu, H. Li, K. Chen, and L. Shou, “KcMF: A Knowledge-
compliant Framework for Schema and Entity Matching with Fine-
tuning-free LLMs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12480 , 2024.
[38] P . He, X. Liu, J. Gao, and W. Chen, “Deberta: decoding-Enhanced
Bert with Disentangled Attention,” in International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2021.
[39] A. Fuxman and R. J. Miller, “Schema Mapping,” in Encyclopedia of
Database Systems . Springer, 2009, pp. 2481–2488.
[40] C. Ma, “Knowledge Enhanced Schema Matching for Heteroge-
neous Data Integration,” Ph.D. dissertation, E ¨otv¨os Lor ´and Uni-
versity, Budapest, Hungary, 2024.
[41] J. Berlin and A. Motro, “Database Schema Matching using Ma-
chine Learning with Feature Selection,” in Advanced Information
Systems Engineering (CAiSE) , 2002, pp. 452–466.
[42] L. Bulygin, “Combining Lexical and Semantic Similarity Mea-
sures with Machine Learning Approach for Ontology and Schema
Matching Problem,” in Data Analytics and Management in Data
Intensive Domains ( DAMDID/RCDL) , 2018, pp. 245–249.
[43] C. Drumm, M. Schmitt, H.-H. Do, and E. Rahm, “Quickmig:
Automatic Schema Matching for Data Migration Projects,” in ACM
conference on Conference on Information and Knowledge Management
(CIKM) , 2007, pp. 107–116.[44] A. Nathalie, “Schema Matching Based on Attribute Values and
Background Ontology,” in AGILE International Conference on Geo-
graphic Information Science , 2009, pp. 1–9.
[45] C. Gao, T. Wu, S. Jing, and Y. Wang, “Medical Schema Matching
using Knowledge Graph Embedding,” in Workshop on Extraction
and Evaluation of Knowledge Entities from Scientific Documents , ser.
CEUR Workshop Proceedings, vol. 3210, 2022, pp. 64–68.
[46] R. Liang, S. Zheng, K. Deng, Z. Mao, W. Ma, and Z. Zhang, “A
Knowledge Graph Enhanced Semantic Matching Method for Plan
Recommendation,” in International Conference on Swarm Intelligence
(ICSI) , 2021, pp. 290–299.
[47] L. Dong and T. Rekatsinas, “Data Integration and Machine Learn-
ing: A Natural Synergy,” Proc. VLDB Endow. , vol. 11, no. 12, pp.
2094–2097, 2018.
[48] C. Chai, N. Tang, J. Fan, and Y. Luo, “Demystifying Artificial
Intelligence for Data Preparation,” in International Conference on
Management of Data (SIGMOD) , S. Das, I. Pandis, K. S. Candan,
and S. Amer-Yahia, Eds., 2023, pp. 13–20.
[49] L. Berti- ´Equille, A. Bonifati, and T. Milo, “Machine Learning to
Data Management: A Round Trip,” in IEEE International Conference
on Data Engineering (ICDE) , 2018, pp. 1735–1738.
[50] R. Cappuzzo, P . Papotti, and S. Thirumuruganathan, “Creating
Embeddings of Heterogeneous Relational Datasets for Data Inte-
gration Tasks,” in International Conference on Management of Data
(SIGMOD) , 2020, pp. 1335–1349.
[51] C. Koutras, M. Fragkoulis, A. Katsifodimos, and C. Lofi, “REMA:
Graph Embeddings-based Relational Schema Matching,” in Work-
shops of the EDBT/ICDT , 2020.
[52] P . Kolyvakis, A. Kalousis, and D. Kiritsis, “DeepAlignment: Un-
supervised Ontology Matching with Refined Word Vectors,” in
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (NAACL-HLT) ,
2018, pp. 787–798.
[53] Y. Li, J. Li, Y. Suhara, A. Doan, and W. Tan, “Deep Entity Matching
with Pre-trained Language Models,” Proc. VLDB Endow. , vol. 14,
no. 1, pp. 50–60, 2020.
[54] S. Thirumuruganathan, H. Li, N. Tang, M. Ouzzani, Y. Govind,
D. Paulsen, G. Fung, and A. Doan, “Deep Learning for Blocking
in Entity Matching: A Design Space Exploration,” Proc. VLDB
Endow. , vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 2459–2472, 2021.
[55] Y. Suhara, J. Li, Y. Li, D. Zhang, C ¸ . Demiralp, C. Chen, and W. Tan,
“Annotating Columns with Pre-trained Language Models,” in
International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD) , 2022,
pp. 1493–1503.
[56] M. Fan, X. Han, J. Fan, C. Chai, N. Tang, G. Li, and X. Du,
“Cost-Effective In-Context Learning for Entity Resolution: A De-
sign Space Exploration,” in IEEE International Conference on Data
Engineering, (ICDE) , 2024, pp. 3696–3709.
[57] H. Li, S. Li, F. Hao, C. J. Zhang, Y. Song, and L. Chen, “BoostER:
Leveraging Large Language Models for Enhancing Entity Resolu-
tion,” in ACM Web Conference (WWW) , 2024, pp. 1043–1046.
[58] R. Peeters and C. Bizer, “Using ChatGPT for Entity Matching,” in
New Trends in Database and Information Systems (ADBIS) , 2023, pp.
221–230.
[59] A. Narayan, I. Chami, L. J. Orr, and C. R ´e, “Can Foundation
Models Wrangle Your Data?” Proc. VLDB Endow. , vol. 16, no. 4,
pp. 738–746, 2022.
[60] Z. Zhang, P . Groth, I. Calixto, and S. Schelter, “Directions Towards
Efficient and Automated Data Wrangling with Large Language
Models,” in International Conference on Data Engineering Workshops
(ICDEW) , 2024, pp. 301–304.
