# 2502.04955.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: ./document-conflict/2502.04955.pdf
# File size: 1706761 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
Claim Extraction for Fact-Checking: Data, Models, and Automated Metrics
Herbert Ullrich
AI Center @ CTU FEE
Charles Square 13,
Prague, Czech Republic
ullriher@fel.cvut.czTomáš Mlyná ˇr
AI Center @ CTU FEE
Charles Square 13,
Prague, Czech Republic
mlynatom@fel.cvut.czJan Drchal
AI Center @ CTU FEE
Charles Square 13,
Prague, Czech Republic
drchajan@fel.cvut.cz
Abstract
In this paper, we explore1the problem of
Claim Extraction using one-to-many text gen-
eration methods, comparing LLMs, small sum-
marization models finetuned for the task, and
a previous NER-centric baseline QACG. As
the current publications on Claim Extraction,
Fact Extraction, Claim Generation and Check-
worthy Claim Detection are quite scattered in
their means and terminology, we compile their
common objectives, releasing the FEVERFact
dataset, with 17K atomic factual claims ex-
tracted from 4K contextualised Wikipedia sen-
tences, adapted from the original FEVER. We
compile the known objectives into an Evalua-
tion framework of: Atomicity, Fluency, Decon-
textualization, Faithfulness checked for each
generated claim separately, and Focus andCov-
erage measured against the full set of predicted
claims for a single input. For each metric,
we implement a scale using a reduction to
an already-explored NLP task. We validate
our metrics against human grading of generic
claims, to see that the model ranking on Ffact,
our hardest metric, did not change and the eval-
uation framework approximates human grading
very closely in terms of F1and RMSE.
1 Introduction
Recent research in Natural Language Processing
has extensively covered the case of automated fact-
checking as a pipeline of retrieval and inference
tasks (Aly et al., 2022; Thorne and Vlachos, 2021).
As noted in other research (Guo et al., 2022), these
steps alone do not represent the whole challenge
human fact-checkers face, notably omitting the step
of coming up with the claims to be checked in the
first place.
The real-world factual claims may be scat-
tered throughout a politician’s social network post,
pieced together from a debate transcript, distilled
1Full code and data supplement available at https://
github.com/aic-factcheck/claim_extraction
Mother  Teresa
She was born in Skopje (now the capital of
the Republic of Macedonia), then part of
the Kosovo Vilayet of the Ottoman Empire.
After living in Macedonia for eighteen
years she moved to Ireland and then to
India, where she lived for most of her life.
In 1950 Teresa founded the Missionaries of
Charity , a Roman Catholic religious
congregation which had over 4,500 sisters
and was active in 133 countries in 2012.
FEVERFact document
Mother Teresa lived most of her life in India.
Mother Teresa lived in Macedonia
for eighteen years.
Mother Teresa lived in Ireland.ContextSour ce sentence ClaimsFigure 1: An example of claim extraction from the
FEVERFact dataset constructed from data published
by Thorne and Vlachos 2021
from a lengthy news article, etc. Research such
as (Barrón-Cedeño et al., 2020) therefore proposes
augmenting the pipeline by the step of claim de-
tection , commonly modelled as classification of
check-worthy claims within a real-world text seg-
mented into its sentences.
The claim detection paradigm, however, only
kicks the can down the road – the detected “check-
worthy” parts of text still need to be processed by
a human fact-checker (Sheikhi et al., 2023) and re-
written into the form of a claim : a factual statement
presenting the source text information without the
need of additional context in a single sentence.
The automated generation of such claims is
desirable not only for the fact-checkers them-
selves (Deng et al., 2024), but also for further
1arXiv:2502.04955v1  [cs.CL]  7 Feb 2025

--- PAGE 2 ---
research in the field (Drchal et al., 2024) where
the generation of claims on top of large-scale cor-
pora was shown to yield valuable data to train mod-
els (Pan et al., 2021).
In this paper, we explore the abstractive meth-
ods of claim extraction, modelled as one-to-many
text-to-text task: after seeing the whole input text,
the model is tasked to formulate a set of claims it
makes, as simple self-contained sentences faithful2
to the source. We construct a downstream task for
the models – the FEVERFact dataset – and com-
pile the criteria previously studied for extracting
factual claims (Wright et al., 2022; Barrón-Cedeño
et al., 2023), proposing methods of their automatic
evaluation at a scale.
This paper explores the claim extraction using
generative methods in breadth, accumulating a set
of data, automated reference-based and reference-
free metrics and proposing solvers for the task,
yielding a complete scheme of the automated gen-
eration of check-worthy claims and measuring their
qualitative properties to identify possible problems
of each claim.
1.1 Main Contributions
1.We publish the FEVERFact dataset (Fig-
ure 1) with 4.4K contextualized Wikipedia
sentences, and a total of 17K check-worthy
claims extracted from them by annotators.
2.We propose an automated evaluation frame-
work for claim extraction reusable for other
generative fact-critical tasks, consisting of 6
metrics: Atomicity, Fluency, Decontextualiza-
tion, Faithfulness, Focus and Coverage. We
compile current research in the field to name
the relevant metrics, as well as to find their
scoring methods, combined with novel ideas
where appropriate (see Section 4).
3.We explore generative methods for extracting
the FEVERFact claims – QACG from (Pan
et al., 2021), LLM prompting, and LM trans-
fer learning, publishing our tuned models.
4.We annotate a blinded sample of generated
claims to validate our evaluation framework
and challenge the benchmarks it produces.
2An interesting close parallel for this task are the single-
sentence summarization methods (also known as the extreme
summarization ) explored before in Narayan et al. 2018; Mao
et al. 2022, finetuning of which we examine as one of the
approaches in Section 3.2 FEVERFact Dataset
In order to obtain a dedicated dataset, we uti-
lize the FEVER Error Correction data published
in (Thorne and Vlachos, 2021). Despite the dataset
being designed for a different task, it releases a set
of 17.5K truthful claims directly extracted from a
sample of sentences of the 2017 Wikipedia corpus.
The annotation of these claims dates back to the
WF1a task of the original FEVER (Thorne et al.,
2018), in which the annotators were instructed to
extract 2–5 claims from a source sentence, being
provided with its neighbouring sentences and page
title for context, as shown in Figure 1 – hereinafter,
we refer to this whole body of text as to the FEVER-
Fact document . Years later, the original source sen-
tence each claim was extracted from, however, may
not be reproduced from the data, as each sentence
is only represented by an integer ID pointing to a
mapping file within a deleted Amazon bucket, lost
to its authors3.
With a simple idea, we manage to reverse-
engineer this mapping: we first group the claims
by the ID of their (unknown) source sentence, tak-
ing the most common Wikipedia article among
each group’s FEVER gold evidence. This should
be the article group was extracted from, since all
the WF1a claims were annotated to be true and
only contain the information from their source sen-
tence, without any additional knowledge. We then,
sentence-by-sentence, scan this article using a Nat-
ural Language Inference (NLI) model, looking for
a sentence which entails the most of the claims in
the group, tossing the groups where no claim is en-
tailed by any sentence due to noise in our method.
Doing so using a nli-deberta-v3-small (He
et al., 2021b,a; Reimers and Gurevych, 2019) pre-
trained CrossEncoder yields near-ideal results – our
annotation on a sample of 2% (89 sentences, 350
claims) datapoints shows that in 94.4% cases the
entire group of claims could be directly extracted
from the reverse-engineered source sentence, only
using its neighbouring sentences and page title to
resolve coreferences.
Thus we release dataset we call FEVERFact :
4.4K 3-sentence documents (plus a page title), each
annotated with a set of claims that may be extracted
from its middle sentence for a total of 17K atomic
factual claims. We split it into train, dev and test
set in an 80:10:10 ratio, preventing the same page
title from appearing in two different splits.
3As per direct Slack communication with FEVER authors.
2

--- PAGE 3 ---
2.1 FEVERFact recall
In the wild, an ideal dataset for claim extraction
would feature allcheck-worthy claims that can be
extracted from given source sentence or even from
the whole FEVERFact document. Such data is ex-
tremely hard to annotate due to the requirement for
claim atomicity4– even relatively simple grammat-
ical paralellisms such as zeugmata or compound
sentences can explode the number of relations that
can be extracted from the sentence.
Even so, having a large-enough sample of claims
matched to a source text would yield a good ap-
proximation on which information within the text
is check-worthy enough to be extracted.
The original annotators behind data used in
FEVERFact were tasked to extract 2–5 check-
worthy claims from the source sentence, pro-
ducing a median of 4 claims per source. To
probe whether this number is enough, we per-
form a Named Entity Recognition (NER) on both
FEVERFact claims and their source sentences us-
ing NameTag 3 (Straková et al., 2019), to find that
the recall of named entity words in FEVER claims
is about 67% (taking source entities as a reference).
While such metric is on the rough side and fu-
ture annotation is desirable, we conclude that the
FEVERFact claims cover most of the information
and are suitable enough to be used as a reference
for reference-based claim extraction metrics (Sec-
tion 4.2).
3 Claim Extraction Models
Using the FEVERFact dataset to train and eval-
uate claim generators, we model the automated
claim extraction as a “one-to-many” sequence-to-
sequence task (Sutskever et al., 2014) – given a
single FEVERFact document, predict a set of facts
it claims. We experiment with prompting, trans-
fer learning and a NER-based baseline used on
FEVER data previously in literature.
To all the models, we do not provide any distinc-
tion (such as separators) between the FEVERFact
source sentence and its context, feeding the whole
FEVERFact document (Figure 1) to each model’s
input. This is done experimentally, to give idea
whether different models are able to learn to only
focus on the information relevant to the user (in
our case, arbitrarily, only the information claimed
by the middle sentence) just from its training/few-
4Each claim describing a single entity or relation, see Sec-
tion 4.1shot examples. If so, this primitive example of
“positional” relevance of input information could
motivate collection of claim extraction datasets
capturing more challenging notions of relevant in-
formation to extract, such as check-worthiness of
claims scattered through a political debate or Twit-
ter discourse, where, unlike in encyclopedic style,
only a small proportion of text is interesting for
checks (Barrón-Cedeño et al., 2023).
We experiment with the following models:
1.Question Answering for Claim Generation
(QACG) (Pan et al., 2021) is an off-the-shelf
baseline we use. It has been built dedicat-
edly to generate claims: given an input text,
its named entities are extracted, fixing each
entity eas an answer for a question Qto be
generated. The (Q, e)is then converted into
a declarative sentence using a QA-to-claim
model, arriving to one factual claim for each
of the source-text entities.
While being a valuable baseline, the entity-
centric approach has its caveats: the QACG
pipeline has many steps, each a language
model and, therefore, a point of failure – mis-
take in any step propagates to the result. The
QACG also lacks trainable parameters for
choosing the appropriate claims. If, for ex-
ample, one wants to generate claims from a
debate, it does not have mechanisms to learn
to omit recurring irrelevant, entity-dense guest
introductions.
2.LLMs and few-shot learning (Brown et al.,
2020) has been recently a popular, universally
well-performing solution to be reckoned with.
Models such as GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023) or
Mistral-instruct (Jiang et al., 2023) have been
shown to adapt well for similar tasks.
We examine gpt-4-turbo in a 3-shot setting
and finetune Mistral-7b-instruct-v0.2
model on our FEVERFact train data using
the quantized QLoRA (Dettmers et al., 2023)
approach with r= 64, α= 32 on 4 bits.
The GPT-4, however, is a blackbox, and the
open-source LLMs are computationally ex-
pensive. This motivates an examinaton of
other methods to be reproducible on much
lower resources using easy-to-obtain data.
3.T5 transfer learning (Raffel et al., 2020):
our small model of choice (based on
3

--- PAGE 4 ---
the preliminary experiments) is the
t5-small-finetuned-xsum5
The T5 was pre-trained on various text-to-text
tasks using a span-corruption objective, mak-
ing it adapt well to our task despite a relatively
small (3.5K FEVERFact documents, 13.5K
claims) train size. We have found that fine-
tuning it on a single-sentence summarization
dataset such as XSum (Narayan et al., 2018)
and then on FEVERFact yields even better
results, possibly due to similar task definition.
Two approaches were examined: first, where
T5 was trained to output a concatenation of all
claims in a single prediction6, second, where
the T5 was tuned to output a single claim as a
sentence (using our data as 13.5K document-
claim pairs). In the prediction stage, the lat-
ter approach was coupled with diverse beam
search (Vijayakumar et al., 2018) decoding
technique to generate arbitrary number ( k) of
single-sentence claims per text, using kbeam
groups and a diversity penalty of 1. Its results
on our task being competitive with the other
models are particularly encouraging, as the
single-sentence summarization data is easily
available in other settings and languages (just
XLSum (Hasan et al., 2021) features data in
45 languages expertly annotated for the task).
4 Evaluation Framework: Claim Metrics
To evaluate our models, we compile claim qual-
ity criteria introduced in other research. Each
predicted claim is checked to be faithful ,fluent ,
atomic anddecontextualized . A set of claims ex-
tracted from the same document is measured to
focus solely on its relevant information and cover
all of it. While the criteria above can be checked by
human grading as in (Wright et al., 2022), research
such as (Wang et al., 2020; Koto et al., 2022) al-
ready proposes ways of how to evaluate some of the
qualities automatically, alleviating the need of hu-
man grading of model outputs. In this section, we
attempt to compile known evaluators for our task,
reducing each metric to an already well-explored
NLP challenge, proceeding to validate our met-
rics against real human annotations on generated
claims.
5Initial weights loaded from openly available https://
huggingface.co/darshkk/t5-small-finetuned-xsum
6The claims were then separated using PySBD (Sadvilkar
and Neumann, 2020)4.1 Reference-free evaluation metrics
For the reference-free metrics which score each
claim on its own, we use the criteria named
by Wright et al. 2022: Atomicity, Fluency, De-
contextualization, and Faithfulness, adapted from
Kuhn et al. 2013’s AIDA (Atomic, Declarative,
Independent, Absolute). To allow automated eval-
uation at a scale, we find following reductions to
known NLP tasks to replace human grading:
1.Atomicity –does the claim describe a single
entity, relation, or process?
While the real-world factual claims are not
often atomic in the true sense (i.e., the claims
are typically more convoluted than “A is B”
or “C does D”), breaking a more complex
factual statement into a set of atomic claims
trivializes the inference on top of such claims,
as well as allows certain level of explainabil-
ity (Dammu et al., 2024), such as which parts
of complex statement disinterpret which facts.
We propose the following scheme of atomic-
ity classification of claim c, reducing it to a
Relationship Extraction task as:
A(c) :=(
1 if|RE(c)| ≤1
0 otherwise
Where the relation-extraction result is in-
terpreted as a set of undirected rela-
tions RE(c) = {{s1, t1}. . .}, in or-
der to avoid counting symmetrical relation-
ships like (Trump, president _of, USA ),
(USA, governed _by, Trump )twice.
For the RE solver, we recommend using
REBEL (Huguet Cabot and Navigli, 2021)
due to its manageable size and end-to-end ap-
proach – other models may rely on entity-pair
extraction and classification (Yamada et al.,
2020) – we proceed to use its Large variant.
We also experimented with a non-binary met-
ricA′(c) =1
max{1,|RE(c)|}, but during our
experiments, non-atomic model outputs were
quite rare, so punishing them by zeroing-out
theirAscore worked best for averaging across
large number of claims.
2.Fluency –is the claim grammatically correct
and intelligible?
The task of fluency, also referred to as gram-
maticallity , is well studied in literature, with
4

--- PAGE 5 ---
most recent research modelling it as a gram-
matical error detection (GED) and correction
(GEC) tasks.
The available techniques range from simpler
ridge regression models based on linguistic
features (Heilman et al., 2014) through us-
ing syntactic log-odds ratio (SLOR) (Kann
et al., 2018) or perturbing the claims words
and characters to find local optima in the out-
put probability using a language model such
as GPT-2 as its reference (Yasunaga et al.,
2021) to promping a LLM (such as GPT-3) to
obtain a model-inferred score using few- or
zero-shot learning (Fu et al., 2024).
The best performing approach we studied re-
volves around CoEdIT (Raheja et al., 2023)
GEC model, coupled with Scribendi score (Is-
lam and Magnani, 2021) to rate the improve-
ment between each claim and its CoEdIT cor-
rection. Scribendi score combines perplexity
scores and Levenshtein distance, yielding -1
for bad correction, 0 for no improvement, and
+1 for correction improving the claim. While
this metric is originally designed for the eval-
uation of GEC systems, it performs well on
rough fluency rating, looking for zero or nega-
tive improvement in CoEdIT corrections:
G(c) :=(
1ifScribendi (c,CoEdIT (c))≤0
0otherwise
3.Decontextualization –can the claim be cor-
rectly interpreted without any additional con-
text from the source document or elsewhere?
Choi et al. 2021 proposes the decontextual-
ization as a text-to-text task, training a T5 to
receive context and a sentence on its input,
outputting the decontextualizated sentence, re-
solving its pronouns into proper nouns and
relative terms into absolute according to the
given context marked with separators.
As with atomicity, a strict binary classifica-
tion worked best, as the non-decontextualized
model outputs were rare. For context, we use
the full FEVERFact document d:
D(d, c) :=(
1if T5 d(d, c) =c
0otherwise
where T5d(d, c)denotes the output of T5 large
model trained by Choi et al. 2021.4.Faithfulness –does the claim contain only
information consistent with its source?
Faithfulness has been extensively studied on
its own to detect hallucination in text-to-text
tasks. ALIGN SCORE claimed a state of the
art in Zha et al. 2023, looking for optimum
alignment of output and input parts, in terms
of a RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) classifier with
aunified alignment function . While compact
(125M parameters in base version), it outper-
forms metrics based on GPT-4 that is orders
of magnitude larger (Zha et al., 2023).
Faith (d, c) := ALIGN SCORE base(d, c)
4.2 Reference-based evaluation metrics
The evaluation metrics introduced above do not
rely on any gold data for their reference. But what
if we need to evaluate the whole group of claims,
to see if it captured all the information it should
and nothing more?
The notion of what a good set of claims is varies
task-to-task, so engineering rules may do more
harm than good. Let us therefore use examples,
like Koto et al. 2022 suggests in their FFCI frame-
work for interpretable summarization metrics, mea-
suring Focus and Coverage to see whether the
model extracts what a human would. Besides the
predicted set of claims C, which serves as the in-
put for multi-claim metrics, assume a set of gold
claims Gextracted from the same document – in
FEVERFact, those would be the full sets of claims
(green in Figure 1) obtained from annotation.
5.Focus –what is the proportion of gold (rele-
vant) information among all the information
listed in the generated claims?
The metric is analogous to the concept of pre-
cision :|true positives |
|positives |, but rather then exact
matching, we seek a measure of semantic over-
lap. FFCI uses QAGS (Wang et al., 2020),
which uses a Question Generation model (QG)
to formulate questions in natural language
based on all |C|predicted claims. The ques-
tions are then twice answered using a Ques-
tion Answering (QA) model, giving it knowl-
edge from (i.) the predicted claims (ii.) the
gold claims written by a human. Focus is then
defined as the proportion of questions with the
same answers extracted from the gold and pre-
dicted claims among all questions the model
5

--- PAGE 6 ---
can generate from the predicted claims. In our
experiments, this metric was too noisy, with
QG, QA and aggregation faults all propagat-
ing into the final result.
To propose a simpler method, we exploit that
the gold claims in Gcan be concatenated into
a mock-document. Since gold claims are de-
contextualized by annotation, this preserves
their meaning, reducing Focus into |C|inde-
pendent tasks of deciding Faithfulness:
Foc(G, C ) :=1
|C|X
c∈CFaith (concat (G), c)
We also encourage experiments with claim-
wise focus , computing the single probability
Foc(G,{c})for each pred. claim cseparately,
to see which exact claim in Cshould be ex-
tracted according to Gand which should not.
6.Coverage –what proportion of gold (relevant)
information from the source is featured in C?
Can be simply adapted from focus:
Cov(G, C ) :=Foc(C, G )
Koto et al. 2022 proposes this trick, and while
our underlying Foc method differs, the argu-
ment swap still works to yield proportion of
gold information extracted into C. Whether
the claims in Care non-decontextualized by
a faulty prediction and could influence each
other’s meanings upon concatenation can be
checked for using the metric from Section 4.1,
marking the claims to toss, or leave them in if
the level of noise is tolerable. We went with
the latter as >94% claims were decontextual-
ized upon human grading (Table 2).
7.Redundancy7–What is the proportion of du-
plicate information among generated claims?
the definitions of Foc andCov inspire an
ellegant estimate of model redundancy – if
|C|claims are generated by a one-to-many
seq2seq model, what proportion of them can
be expressed from the other model outputs:
Red(C) :=1
|C|X
c∈CFaith (concat (C\c), c)
7Unlike Focus and Coverage, we did not validate this Re-
dundancy metric with annotations, but as its validity stems
from the same principles as that of Foc andCov, we feature
it anyways for added insights. The metric was motivated by
feedback from the annotators of data used for Table 24.3 Ffact-value
As our experiments in Section 5 suggest, the Foc
andCov do indeed behave like Precision and Re-
call metrics in the sense of their mutual tradeoff
– if a naïve model scores very high in one (such
as QACG covering every part of the FEVERFact
document), a significant decrease can be observed
in the other.
In our experience, the reference-free single-
claim metrics (Section 4.1) did not pose a tough
challenge to modern NLP methods, most of their
corresponding mean scores in both Table 1 and 2
being very high, raising a concern they may be
a too-easy benchmark nowadays. Provided with
the gold annotations for each source document, we
therefore suggest that the most important aggregate
metric to compare the future claim extraction SotA
models should be the Ffactscore – harmonic mean
ofFoc andCov.
5 Results
After training the models described in Section 3
on FEVERFact dataset, we had each model extract
a set of claims from each of 444 FEVERFact-test
documents. We evaluated the claims using the au-
tomated metrics described in previous Section 4.
To validate the metrics, we have also annotated
a subset of 9% (40) FEVERFact-test documents
(and 1110 claims extracted from them by the mod-
els in total), using a custom annotation platform
described in Appendix A.
5.1 Model comparison
In tables 1 and 2 we use the automated and human-
annotated metrics to benchmark our models, on
full FEVERFact-test set and a sample of 40 doc-
uments, respectively. The benchmarks reveal that
all models score high in Atomicity, Fluency, De-
contextualization, and Faithfulness reference-free
metrics – confirmed by the human annotations used
to compute the Table 2, these do not appear to be
the challenges modern NLP claim-extractors would
struggle with.
The reference-based metrics of Focus and Cover-
age are where significant differences can be found
and tradeoffs can be seen – models with highest
coverage focus too little and vice versa. Taking
their harmonic mean, Ffact, the fine-tuned models
qlora-mistral-instruct andt5_sm take a sig-
nificant lead, showing that the models were able
to learn that the FEVERFact claims come from
6

--- PAGE 7 ---
Model Atomicity Fluency Decontext. Faith. Focus Coverage Ffact Redundancy7
qacg 0.89 0.69 0.70 0.88 0.20 0.67 0.30 0.44
gpt-4-turbo-3-shot 0.92 0.70 0.77 0.99 0.21 0.81 0.34 0.14
qlora-mistral-instruct 0.95 0.75 0.80 0.95 0.58 0.63 0.61 0.19
t5_sm_diverse_7_beams 0.95 0.74 0.80 0.91 0.55 0.58 0.56 0.59
t5_sm_multi-claim 0.96 0.76 0.82 0.95 0.58 0.51 0.55 0.54
Evaluation methodREBEL CoEdIT T5 Align- Concat Concat
|rel| ≤1 +Scribendi Decontext Score AlignS. AlignS.
Validation against human 0.96 0.80 0.86 0.92 0.23 0.22
Validation method F1– higher is better Root mean squared error – lower is better
Table 1: Automated claim metric averages across model-generated claims on FEVERFact test set. The best value
for each metric marked bold. Model choices and training procedures described in Section 3, claim quality metrics in
Section 4. Automated scoring methods and their validation against human grading (Table 2) in italic.
Model Atomicity Fluency Decontext. Faith. Focus Coverage Ffact
qacg 0.99 0.85 0.91 0.76 0.19 0.60 0.28
gpt-4-turbo-3-shot 0.98 0.97 0.96 0.93 0.24 0.79 0.37
qlora-mistral-instruct 1.00 0.96 0.96 0.90 0.60 0.69 0.64
t5_sm_diverse_7_beams 0.99 0.89 0.95 0.79 0.51 0.62 0.56
t5_sm_multi-claim 1.00 0.91 0.94 0.88 0.47 0.50 0.49
Inter-annotator agreement (sample of ∼23% annotated claims, ≤5 annotators per claim, at least 2)
Krippendorff’s α 0.27 0.41 -0.01 0.53 0.75 0.64
GWET’s AC1 0.95 0.86 0.85 0.83 0.80 0.66
%-agreement 0.87 0.86 0.97 0.84 0.88 0.82
Table 2: Blinded human annotation averages across a sample of 1110 claims generated from 40 (9%) FEVERFact
test documents. Annotation of reference-free metrics (left) was done using grading scales (Appendix A) adapted
from Wright et al. 2022 binarizing the best grade to 1, others to 0. Reference-based metrics (right) annotated
using a checkbox interface over gold and pred. claims (Appendix A). The best value for each metric marked
bold. Inter-annotator agreement experiment results in italic. Krippendorff’s αleft in for completeness, albeit very
inappropriate for tasks with such class imbalance, as also noted by Wright et al. 2022, Gwet’s AC1 being the more
appropriate agreement metric for our task.
the middle sentence on input, which is the infor-
mation annotators were tasked to focus on in the
original Thorne et al. 2018’s annotation experiment
– hopefully, this could mean the models could be
tuned for trickier notions of check-worthiness, such
as those studied by Barrón-Cedeño et al. 2023, in
future works.
The T5 coupled with diverse beam search decod-
ing strategy described in Section 3 shows promis-
ing results, despite it being essentially an abstrac-
tive summarization model. Its redundancy is the
highest (diverse outputs only assured through a de-
coding strategy), but not a clear outlier. We find
this very encouraging for further use of the diverse
beam search predictioning in settings where only
one claim per source document is annotated, such
as in A VeriTeC-DCE (Deng et al., 2024), to pro-
duce multiple interesting results. Datasets like XL-
Sum (Hasan et al., 2021) with an objective highlysimilar to claim extraction and good availability
of summarization models across languages make
it an accessible choice with competitive perfor-
mance. While the GPT-4 could have certainly been
prompted to fit to the FEVERFact claim extraction
better than in our study, we still recommend to
use the provided t5’s or Mistral as the baseline
for future investigations for their size, ease of use,
and trainability for whichever claims one wants to
extract through examples.
5.2 Metric validation
To validate our evaluation framework, we have an-
notated the claim properties on grading scales with
instructions adapted from (Wright et al., 2022) and
the Focus and Coverage using a simple checkbox
interfaces shown in attachment A.
The human annotations confirm that the
reference-free methods (Section 4.1) are easy for
7

--- PAGE 8 ---
today’s models. They, surprisingly, also preserve
the leaderboard of models based on Ffact, the hard-
est metric, requiring an understanding of which
claims are relevant in FEVERFact data and punish-
ing greedy approaches. We evaluate the reference-
free metric estimation methods using the F1score,
chosen due to the imbalance of classes on real gen-
erated claims (this goes hand in hand with metrics
being too easy for models). For faithfulness and flu-
ency, we binarize the human-annotated grades (the
highest grade to 1, others to 0), to be directly com-
parable with automated metrics (Section 4) – Align-
Score used for Faithfulness was simply rounded to
0 or 1 (threshold 0.5) for this experiment. All met-
rics score above 80%F1, testifying to their sound-
ness and usability at a scale in scenarios where a
good approximation is enough.
We proceed to validate our Focus and Coverage
metrics against human annotation, using the root
mean squared error to obtain values around 0.22,
which is also encouraging for further use. To see
whether this value is not accidental (correct propor-
tion, but erroneously distinguished gold claims),
we also measure the claimwise Foc andCov to see
the per-claim contribution to metrics as a probabil-
ityFoc(G,{c}),Cov({g}, C), as shown in Sec-
tion 4.2. We compare them to claimwise annota-
tions, and asses their quality using a Brier score as
suggested in Rufibach 2010. We measure 0.15 for
Foc and 0.12 for Cov (lower Brier score is better),
in other research sometimes interpreted (Fernandes,
2011) as a “superior” agreement.
5.3 Inter-Annotator Agreement
The inter-annotation aggreement study is presented
in Table 2. Due to missing annotations, our first
choice for it was the Krippendorff’s αcoefficient
(Krippendorff, 2011). Its results are, however,
abysmally low on our annotations, even reach-
ing negative values reserved for annotation van-
dalism – the cause of this are very high levels of
class prevalence in our annotations8, overly increas-
ing the chance of accidental agreement Krippen-
dorff’s alpha targets to punish. This is a known
pitfall of Krippendorff’s alpha, also encountered
in the Wright et al. 2022’s paper which proposed
the reference-free metrics. To overcome it, we also
report the Gwet’s Agreement Coefficient 1 (AC1)
that was designed to be less sensitive to trait preva-
8Prevalence of the most common class in faithfulness, flu-
ency, atomicity and decontextualisation grading is 0.84, 0.9,
0.98, and 0.91, respectively.lence. (Gwet, 2010) We report the values9for AC1
coefficient in table 2. From the results, we can
see that the AC1 coefficient is high in all cases10
thus, we conclude that our annotation process was
reliable. To provide a complete measurement, we
also report %-agreement – a proportion of labels
on which all annotators agree (Artstein, 2017).
6 Conclusion
Our study has examined the problematic of au-
tomated claim extraction in its full scope: from
data gathering (publishing FEVERFact dataset)
through model training (suggesting low- and high-
resource options), benchmarking (publishing a
Python framework for automated evaluation) to its
validation with annotators, suggesting the hardest
and most appropriate score for claim extraction be-
ing the Ffactwe introduce in Section 4.3, requiring
gold claims for reference.
Interestingly, we have shown that the task of
claim extraction can be to a significant extent
solved using single-sentence abstractive summa-
rization methods and a diverse beam search decod-
ing strategy, which is particularly interesting for
low-resource languages and environments.
Overall, we have aimed this aticle as a breadth-
first exploration of the claim extraction task using
abstractive methods, pointing directions which to
explore in more depth.
6.1 Future works
A central challenge to claim extraction is the notion
of claim check-worthiness , now explored as a clas-
sification task, for example by Barrón-Cedeño et al.
2023. Our paper models a dummy version of it,
training the models to only focus on the middle sen-
tence claims like FEVER annotators did. Adapting
existing data such as CLEF-CheckThat! datasets
for text generation, rather than classification task,
could capitalize on our findings to train generative
models which only focus on check-worthy claims.
We also encourage the use of our evaluation
metric framework to yield additional insights into
any system for knowledge-intensive tasks, espe-
cially where multiple gold answers can be found or
synthesized, such as Summarization or Retrieval-
Augmented Generation (RAG).
9Values were computed using Python port of R library
irrCAC - https://irrcac.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
10The Gwet’s AC1 coefficient ranges from 0 to 1.
8

--- PAGE 9 ---
Limitations
The main limitation of the work is that it does not
explore a specific sound notion of check-worthiness
for measuring the claim focus andcoverage , but
model it after the FEVER WF1a annotation ob-
jective, which instructs the annotators to extract
2-5 relevant claims from the middle sentencence
of shown context. This is a sort of a dummy ob-
jective to optimize for (albeit, has its sense, since
every sentence in encyclopedic style is supposed
to contain some check-worthy claim), and the fact
that our SotA model scores Ffact = 0.64express-
ing the extent to which it extracts the same claims
human would only motivates the research on what
other objectives of claim relevancy could the mod-
els be trained for, rather than marking the claim
extraction challenge as resolved.
So, while we have the approaches and metrics
that have been validated in vitro against human
gradings of the same task, the generalization of
the scheme to claim extraction in the wild remains
largely to be explored.
Ethics Statement
While our data and evaluation framework seems
to be disambiguous enough to use, our proposed
method of generating the factual claims using a one-
to-many abstractive text-to-text approach raises
critical requirements on the deployment of such
models. The models are suitable to produce claims
at a scale, and the evaluation framework can pin-
point most of their hallucinations. However, the
use of such models to intepret individual person’s
claims in language forms such as Tweets and de-
bate transcripts, like Barrón-Cedeño et al. 2020
do in their check-worthy claim detection tasks, is
ethically problematic, as the abstractive models
have no hard guarantee of aligning to the facts and
semantical nuances of the speaker. The models
should therefore be avoided to use without a hu-
man in the loop in such scenario, and their use
should be disclosed.
Furthermore, we declare that we have used LLM-
based code assistants when producing the code
supplement of this paper, to generate boilerplate
Python code.
References
Rami Aly, Christos Christodoulopoulos, Oana Co-
carascu, Zhijiang Guo, Arpit Mittal, MichaelSchlichtkrull, James Thorne, and Andreas Vlachos,
editors. 2022. Proceedings of the Fifth Fact Extrac-
tion and VERification Workshop (FEVER) . Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics, Dublin, Ireland.
Ron Artstein. 2017. Inter-annotator Agreement , pages
297–313. Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht.
Alberto Barrón-Cedeño, Firoj Alam, Tommaso Caselli,
Giovanni Da San Martino, Tamer Elsayed, An-
drea Galassi, Fatima Haouari, Federico Ruggeri, Ju-
lia Maria Struss, Rabindra Nath Nandi, Gullal S.
Cheema, Dilshod Azizov, and Preslav Nakov. 2023.
The clef-2023 checkthat! lab: Checkworthiness, sub-
jectivity, political bias, factuality, and authority. In
Advances in Information Retrieval , pages 506–517,
Cham. Springer Nature Switzerland.
Alberto Barrón-Cedeño, Tamer Elsayed, Preslav Nakov,
Giovanni Da San Martino, Maram Hasanain, Reem
Suwaileh, Fatima Haouari, Nikolay Babulkov,
Bayan Hamdan, Alex Nikolov, Shaden Shaar, and
Zien Sheikh Ali. 2020. Overview of checkthat! 2020:
Automatic identification and verification of claims in
social media. Preprint , arXiv:2007.07997.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-V oss,
Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child,
Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens
Winter, Chris Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Ma-
teusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack
Clark, Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec
Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. 2020.
Language models are few-shot learners. In Ad-
vances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,
volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates,
Inc.
Eunsol Choi, Jennimaria Palomaki, Matthew Lamm,
Tom Kwiatkowski, Dipanjan Das, and Michael
Collins. 2021. Decontextualization: Making sen-
tences stand-alone. Transactions of the Association
for Computational Linguistics , 9:447–461.
Preetam Prabhu Srikar Dammu, Himanshu Naidu,
Mouly Dewan, YoungMin Kim, Tanya Roosta, Aman
Chadha, and Chirag Shah. 2024. ClaimVer: Explain-
able claim-level verification and evidence attribution
of text through knowledge graphs. In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2024 , pages 13613–13627, Miami, Florida, USA.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Zhenyun Deng, Michael Schlichtkrull, and Andreas Vla-
chos. 2024. Document-level claim extraction and de-
contextualisation for fact-checking. In Proceedings
of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 11943–11954, Bangkok, Thailand. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
9

--- PAGE 10 ---
Tim Dettmers, Artidoro Pagnoni, Ari Holtzman, and
Luke Zettlemoyer. 2023. Qlora: Efficient finetuning
of quantized llms. Preprint , arXiv:2305.14314.
Jan Drchal, Herbert Ullrich, Tomáš Mlyná ˇr, and Václav
Moravec. 2024. Pipeline and dataset generation for
automated fact-checking in almost any language.
Jose Fernandes. 2011. Data analysis advances in ma-
rine science for fisheries management: Supervised
classification applications . Ph.D. thesis.
Jinlan Fu, See-Kiong Ng, Zhengbao Jiang, and Pengfei
Liu. 2024. GPTScore: Evaluate as you desire. In
Proceedings of the 2024 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: Human Language Technologies
(Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 6556–6576, Mexico
City, Mexico. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Zhijiang Guo, Michael Schlichtkrull, and Andreas Vla-
chos. 2022. A survey on automated fact-checking.
Transactions of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , 10:178–206.
Kilem L Gwet. 2010. Handbook of inter-rater reliabil-
ity: The definitive guide to measuring the extent of
agreement among raters . Advanced Analytics, LLC.
Tahmid Hasan, Abhik Bhattacharjee, Md. Saiful Is-
lam, Kazi Mubasshir, Yuan-Fang Li, Yong-Bin Kang,
M. Sohel Rahman, and Rifat Shahriyar. 2021. XL-
sum: Large-scale multilingual abstractive summariza-
tion for 44 languages. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021 ,
pages 4693–4703, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Pengcheng He, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. 2021a.
Debertav3: Improving deberta using electra-style pre-
training with gradient-disentangled embedding shar-
ing. Preprint , arXiv:2111.09543.
Pengcheng He, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng Gao, and
Weizhu Chen. 2021b. Deberta: Decoding-enhanced
bert with disentangled attention. In International
Conference on Learning Representations .
Michael Heilman, Aoife Cahill, Nitin Madnani, Melissa
Lopez, Matthew Mulholland, and Joel Tetreault.
2014. Predicting grammaticality on an ordinal scale.
InProceedings of the 52nd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 2:
Short Papers) , pages 174–180, Baltimore, Maryland.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Pere-Lluís Huguet Cabot and Roberto Navigli. 2021.
REBEL: Relation extraction by end-to-end language
generation. In Findings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2021 , pages 2370–
2381, Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association
for Computational Linguistics.Md Asadul Islam and Enrico Magnani. 2021. Is this the
end of the gold standard? a straightforward reference-
less grammatical error correction metric. In Proceed-
ings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing , pages 3009–3015,
Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Men-
sch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego
de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guil-
laume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, Lélio Renard Lavaud,
Marie-Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Teven Le Scao,
Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang, Timothée Lacroix,
and William El Sayed. 2023. Mistral 7b. Preprint ,
arXiv:2310.06825.
Katharina Kann, Sascha Rothe, and Katja Filippova.
2018. Sentence-level fluency evaluation: References
help, but can be spared! In Proceedings of the
22nd Conference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning , pages 313–323, Brussels, Belgium.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Fajri Koto, Timothy Baldwin, and Jey Han Lau. 2022.
Ffci: A framework for interpretable automatic evalu-
ation of summarization.
Klaus Krippendorff. 2011. Computing krippendorff’s
alpha-reliability.
Tobias Kuhn, Paolo Emilio Barbano, Mate Levente
Nagy, and Michael Krauthammer. 2013. Broadening
the scope of nanopublications. In The Semantic Web:
Semantics and Big Data , pages 487–501, Berlin, Hei-
delberg. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. Preprint , arXiv:1907.11692.
Yuning Mao, Ming Zhong, and Jiawei Han. 2022. Cite-
Sum: Citation text-guided scientific extreme sum-
marization and domain adaptation with limited su-
pervision. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference
on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, pages 10922–10935, Abu Dhabi, United Arab
Emirates. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Shashi Narayan, Shay B. Cohen, and Mirella Lapata.
2018. Don’t give me the details, just the summary!
topic-aware convolutional neural networks for ex-
treme summarization. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing , pages 1797–1807, Brussels, Bel-
gium. Association for Computational Linguistics.
OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report. Preprint ,
arXiv:2303.08774.
Liangming Pan, Wenhu Chen, Wenhan Xiong, Min-
Yen Kan, and William Yang Wang. 2021. Zero-shot
fact verification by claim generation. In Proceedings
of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for
10

--- PAGE 11 ---
Computational Linguistics and the 11th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 476–483, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Kather-
ine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi
Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the
limits of transfer learning with a unified text-to-text
transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
21(140):1–67.
Vipul Raheja, Dhruv Kumar, Ryan Koo, and Dongyeop
Kang. 2023. CoEdIT: Text editing by task-specific
instruction tuning. In Findings of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2023 , pages
5274–5291, Singapore. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-
BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-
networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages
3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Kaspar Rufibach. 2010. Use of brier score to assess
binary predictions. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology ,
63(8):938–939.
Nipun Sadvilkar and Mark Neumann. 2020. PySBD:
Pragmatic sentence boundary disambiguation. In
Proceedings of Second Workshop for NLP Open
Source Software (NLP-OSS) , pages 110–114, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ghazaal Sheikhi, Samia Touileb, and Sohail Khan. 2023.
Automated claim detection for fact-checking: A case
study using Norwegian pre-trained language models.
InProceedings of the 24th Nordic Conference on
Computational Linguistics (NoDaLiDa) , pages 1–9,
Tórshavn, Faroe Islands. University of Tartu Library.
Jana Straková, Milan Straka, and Jan Hajic. 2019. Neu-
ral architectures for nested NER through lineariza-
tion. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics , pages
5326–5331, Florence, Italy. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Ilya Sutskever, Oriol Vinyals, and Quoc V . Le. 2014.
Sequence to sequence learning with neural networks.
InProceedings of the 27th International Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems - Volume
2, NIPS’14, page 3104–3112, Cambridge, MA, USA.
MIT Press.
James Thorne and Andreas Vlachos. 2021. Evidence-
based factual error correction. In Proceedings of the
59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (Vol-
ume 1: Long Papers) , pages 3298–3309, Online. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos
Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. 2018.
FEVER: a large-scale dataset for fact extraction
and VERification. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
Papers) , pages 809–819, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ashwin Vijayakumar, Michael Cogswell, Ramprasaath
Selvaraju, Qing Sun, Stefan Lee, David Crandall,
and Dhruv Batra. 2018. Diverse beam search for
improved description of complex scenes. Proceed-
ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,
32(1).
Alex Wang, Kyunghyun Cho, and Mike Lewis. 2020.
Asking and answering questions to evaluate the fac-
tual consistency of summaries. In Proceedings of the
58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics , pages 5008–5020, Online. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Dustin Wright, David Wadden, Kyle Lo, Bailey Kuehl,
Arman Cohan, Isabelle Augenstein, and Lucy Lu
Wang. 2022. Generating scientific claims for zero-
shot scientific fact checking. In Proceedings of the
60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages
2448–2460, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Ikuya Yamada, Akari Asai, Hiroyuki Shindo, Hideaki
Takeda, and Yuji Matsumoto. 2020. LUKE: Deep
contextualized entity representations with entity-
aware self-attention. In Proceedings of the 2020
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP) , pages 6442–6454, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Michihiro Yasunaga, Jure Leskovec, and Percy Liang.
2021. LM-critic: Language models for unsupervised
grammatical error correction. In Proceedings of the
2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing , pages 7752–7763, Online and
Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Yuheng Zha, Yichi Yang, Ruichen Li, and Zhiting Hu.
2023. AlignScore: Evaluating factual consistency
with a unified alignment function. In Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
pages 11328–11348, Toronto, Canada. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
11

--- PAGE 12 ---
A Annotation Platform
To facilitate the human annotations, we have cre-
ated a PHP annotation platform. It supports the
annotation of the quality of the claim (example in
Figure 3), multi-claim annotation (example in Fig-
ure 4) and also cross-annotations providing data
for the inter-annotator agreement evaluation.
The claim quality annotation page first presents
the grading scale to let the annotators familiarize
themselves with it. Then, a sample was provided
with a highlighted sentence from which most of the
claims should have been extracted. The claims
obtained with various models are presented be-
low. These claims were shuffled to avoid bias to-
wards any model. Moreover, the annotators did not
know which model generated/extracted each claim.
Given the context sample and a claim, the annota-
tors were asked to grade the quality by assigning
scores11. To help the annotators fill scores, we have
provided a help popup with information on which
metric they are considering now. An example of
the popups is shown in Figure 2.
The second type of annotation was the multi-
claim annotation, where the annotators were first
asked to evaluate coverage and then the focus.
These annotations were done per model. However,
the model type was hidden so as not to induce any
bias.
Figure 2: Example of popup help for the claim quality
annotation. This example shows the help for the faith-
fullness metric and simillar popups were provided also
for the other ones.
11Scores are from range 0-3 for faithfulness and fluency,
and either 0 or 1 for contextualized and atomicity.
12

--- PAGE 13 ---
... (~25 claims total)Figure 3: Example of the claim quality annotation page. The annotators were asked to grade the quality of the
claimss.
13

--- PAGE 14 ---
... (5 blinded models, then again with switched sides for focus)Figure 4: Example of the multi-claim annotation page. The annotators were asked to evaluate the coverage and
focus of the claims.
14
