# 2502.08080.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: ./document-conflict/2502.08080.pdf
# File size: 1512611 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
NLI under the Microscope:
What Atomic Hypothesis Decomposition Reveals
Neha Srikanth
University of Maryland, College Park
nehasrik@umd.eduRachel Rudinger
University of Maryland, College Park
rudinger@umd.edu
Abstract
Decomposition of text into atomic propositions
is a flexible framework allowing for the closer
inspection of input and output text. We use
atomic decomposition of hypotheses in two
natural language reasoning tasks, traditional
NLI and defeasible NLI, to form atomic sub-
problems , or granular inferences that models
must weigh when solving the overall problem.
These atomic sub-problems serve as a tool to
further understand the structure of both NLI
and defeasible reasoning, probe a model’s con-
sistency and understanding of different infer-
ences, and measure the diversity of examples
in benchmark datasets. Our results indicate
that LLMs still struggle with logical consis-
tency on atomic NLI and defeasible NLI sub-
problems. Lastly, we identify critical atomic
sub-problems of defeasible NLI examples, or
those that most contribute to the overall label,
and propose a method to measure the inferen-
tial consistency of a model, a metric designed to
capture the degree to which a model makes con-
sistently correct or incorrect predictions about
the same fact under different contexts.
1 Introduction
Atomic decomposition involves breaking sentences
down into atomic propositions , or granular facts
that are explicitly supported by the original text.
This style of decomposition has widespread appli-
cations, including assessing the factual precision
of generated text (Min et al., 2023), claim verifica-
tion (Chen et al., 2024), and multihop QA (Perez
et al., 2020), since it allows for careful, finer-
grained inspection of text.
We use atomic decomposition as tool to dive
deeper into two types of natural language reason-
ing: traditional NLI (Giampiccolo et al., 2007) and
defeasible inference (Rudinger et al., 2020), a mode
of reasoning where inferences may change in light
of new evidence. In both tasks, atomic decompo-
sition of hypotheses into atoms breaks complex
 
Atomic Hypothesis Decomposition 
 
Natural Language Inference 
 
Defeasible Inference ( δ-NLI) 
  Updates (U) 
Hypothesis (H) 
   [Professional ]1 [actors ]2 are in a [summer ]2 performance. 
weakens 
 
 
H
Kids put on a show in 
summer camp. 
a1 
a2 
a3 no effect 
strengthens  
 
It begins to snow during 
their performance. 
a1 
a2 
a3 no effect no effect 
weakens 
The people are 
actors. The people are 
professional. 
H
? 
 ? 
weakens weakens 
The performance 
is during summer . a1 a2 a3 
Premise (P) 
Four entertainers are 
performing at an 
outdoor theater . 
 neutral neutral neutral neutral 
a1 a2 a3 Figure 1: Top: Atomic hypothesis decomposition
breaks down hypotheses ( H) into entailed propositional
“atoms” ( a1−a3). Middle: Pairing the premise ( P) with
each atom yields a set of NLI sub-problems ( P+a);
the sub-problem labels predict the full NLI problem
(P+H) label. Bottom: Paired with an update ( U), each
atom yields a defeasible NLI sub-problem ( P+a+U);
the set of sub-problem labels are predictive of the full
problem ( P+H+U) label, but the non-monotonic
relationship is more complex than for traditional NLI.
sentences into granular pieces of information that
models must weigh when drawing higher level in-
ferences, producing atomic sub-problems . We use
these sub-problems not only for better insight into
the structure and nuances of NLI and defeasible
NLI, but also to assess accompanying benchmarks
and to more deeply probe the robustness of models’
situational understanding.1
Consider the example in Figure 1 of a premise
and hypothesis with a neutral relationship. When
predicting an overall neutral relation, a model must
1Code and data available at https://github.com/
nehasrikn/nli-atoms .arXiv:2502.08080v2  [cs.CL]  7 Mar 2025

--- PAGE 2 ---
determine the relation between the premise and
each of the three atomic propositions that together
form the hypothesis — in this case, all of which
are neutral. If the model predicts an entailment or
a contradiction between the premise and one of the
atoms, its understanding of the situation may be
called into question.
We first present our two tasks of interest (§2) and
discuss the utility of atomic sub-problems and their
construction (§3). Then, we analyze the behavior
of large language models (LLMs) on atomic sub-
problems in traditional NLI (§4) where we evalu-
ate their logical consistency between each original
SNLIinstance and its corresponding sub-problems.
We find that despite high accuracy, LLMs still
struggle with logical consistency. Then, we study
atomic sub-problems in defeasible NLI (§5) and
propose a framework to pinpoint the inference(s)
evaluated in each example by way of the question
under discussion of examples, a well-studied lin-
guistic phenomenon (Benz and Jasinskaja, 2017;
Wu et al., 2023). Finally, we present a method to
group defeasible NLI examples based on related
atomic sub-problems (§6) and measure the inferen-
tial consistency of a model, a metric capturing the
likelihood that its prediction for a particular infer-
ence will remain consistently correct or incorrect
under different contexts.
2 Background
2.1 Natural Language Inference
Natural language inference (Giampiccolo et al.,
2007; MacCartney, 2009; Bowman et al., 2015)
is the task of determining whether a premise P
entails, contradicts, or is neutral in relation to a
hypothesis, H. For example, the premise “A little
girl in a lush green field” contradicts the hypothe-
sis“A little girl rides her ox in a desert” , as “desert”
directly contradicts the “lush green field”.
SNLI.The first large-scale NLI dataset, SNLI,
uses image captions as premises paired with hy-
potheses elicited from crowdworkers. Though
this benchmark has been well-saturated by LLMs
over the past few years, it serves as a useful re-
source for studies in model robustness (Srikanth
and Rudinger, 2022; Kaushik et al., 2019) and an-
notation artifacts (Gururangan et al., 2018).
2.2 Defeasible Inference
Defeasible reasoning is a form of non-monotonic
reasoning in which inferences may be altered inlight of new evidence (Reiter, 1980). For exam-
ple, given the premise “A group of people sitting
around a rectangular table” , the inference “they
have a work meeting” is weakened upon learning
that“the people are toddlers. ”
δ-NLI.Rudinger et al. (2020) introduce the task
of defeasible natural language inference and an ac-
companying benchmark, δ-NLI. Given a Pand
Hpair with a neutral relation, a third update sen-
tence Ustrengthens Hif, upon reading U,His
more likely to be true, and weakens HifHis less
likely to be true upon reading U. Defeasible NLI
is then a binary classification task of predicting a
strengthener or weakener label for a (P, H, U )set.
δ-NLIis built on top of three popular commonsense
reasoning datasets: SNLI(Bowman et al., 2015),
ATOMIC (Sap et al., 2019), and SOCIAL -CHEM -
101 (Forbes et al., 2020). For a PandHpair (or,
in the case of SOCIAL -CHEM -101 , justH), crowd-
workers write an update sentence for a target label,
but are not instructed to target a particular part of
Hwhen doing so. The authors ensure that the train,
development, and test splits of the data are split
at the P-Hlevel to avoid leakage. Crowdworkers
may not write updates that directly contradict infor-
mation in the premise. For simplicity, we focus on
theSNLI-derived split of δ-NLI, orδ-SNLI, which
selects neutral P-HSNLIpairs.
2.3 Related Work
Atomic decomposition has been used in fact check-
ing (Min et al., 2023; Glover et al., 2022; Yuan
and Vlachos, 2024), claim verification (Chen et al.,
2024), summarization (Nenkova and Passonneau,
2004), and text-to-image generation (Cho et al.,
2023) among others. Kamoi et al. (2023) construct
a dataset of claims and sub-claims for claim check-
ing where sub-claims, analogous to our atoms, are
labeled with respect to evidence. Most relevant
to our work, Stacey et al. (2022) train a span-
based NLI model to make span-level decisions on
SNLIand SICK examples that are composed to
produce an overall label. In contrast, our work
measures the logical consistency of LLMs that may
have seen NLI data during pretraining, but that are
not explicitly trained to weigh atomic inferences.
Their followup (Stacey et al., 2024) trains another
NLI system using LLM-generated atoms, however
their study focuses primarily on premise decompo-
sition. To the best of our knowledge, our study is
the first to explore atoms in defeasible inference.

--- PAGE 3 ---
3 Atomic Sub-Problems in NLI
Reasoning about situations often involves weighing
multiple pieces of information to draw inferences.
Consider the last row in Table 1. A human de-
termining that Hcontradicts Pwill attribute the
contradiction to the fact that Pmentions a father
and daughter, but Hmentions two men. Implicitly,
they will have also weighed the fact that H’s men-
tion of “cutting grass” is entailed by P’s mention
of a lawnmower, and so it does not contribute to the
contradiction. We treat these two determinations
as distinct atomic sub-problems .
Hypotheses in SNLI, and in turn, δ-SNLI, can
be complex sentences, and while solving inference
problems, models must weigh all pieces of informa-
tion in both PandH. We expect humans to make
inferences about constituent pieces of information
in a manner that is consistent with their overall
judgment, an equally desirable property in models.
Not only does it signal holistic understanding of
the situation described in the problem, but it can
help pinpoint exactly what types of inferences mod-
els struggle with. Identifying atomic sub-problems
also allows us to understand the granular inferences
that are evaluated in benchmark datasets. In turn,
this helps to understand the diversity in the dataset:
despite there being thousands of examples, certain
inferences may come up repeatedly.
To identify the constituent sub-problems, we
break hypotheses inSNLIandδ-SNLIinto atomic
propositions (Wanner et al., 2024) to use in subse-
quent analyses. Each atomic decomposition rep-
resents a single piece of information. Formally,
given an SNLIexample with PandH, we gen-
erate atomic decompositions of Hrepresented by
a1...an. Each atomic sub-problem then involves
predicting the relation between a ( P,ai) tuple
(§4.1). Given a δ-NLIexample with P,H, and
U, atomic sub-problems involve a ( P,ai,U) tuple
where the task is to determine whether Ustrength-
ens, weakens, or has no effect on ai(§5).
3.1 Generating Atomic Propositions
To generate atomic propositions, we draw on Neo-
Davidsonian event-based semantic representations
of sentences (Castañeda, 1967; Parsons, 1990).
Sentences can be represented in first-order logi-
cal form as conjunctions of predicates representing
entities, where actions are explicitly represented
with event variables and predicate arguments are
mapped to semantic roles (Dowty, 1991). For ex-ample, the sentence “The juggler performs at a
party” could be represented as:
∃x1∃e(Juggler (x1)∧Perform (e)∧Agent (e, x1)∧
∃x2(Party (x2)∧At(e, x2)))
Each conjunct can then be mapped to a natural lan-
guage expression, called an atom . This ensures that
both arguments of actions andthe actions them-
selves are included as separate atoms.
We draw on this intuition to carefully hand-
construct exemplars, a methodology shown to
improve the atomicity and groundedness of de-
compositions (Wanner et al., 2024). We prompt
llama-3-8b-instruct with these exemplars (Ap-
pendix A) to generate atoms for each example in
theδ-SNLItest set (henceforth, δ-SNLI-TEST ), as
well as for 1000 randomly sampled examples in the
SNLI test set ( SNLI-TEST -SAMPLE ). See Table 5
for dataset statistics.
3.2 Validating Atomic Decompositions
Valid atomic decompositions of hypotheses must
be logically entailed from the hypothesis they were
decomposed from. For our experiments on SNLI-
TEST -SAMPLE (§4), we do not validate atom en-
tailment ourselves, letting each model determine
whether Hentails each aiitself (§4.1), and only
measuring consistency on the atomic sub-problems
that the model itself admits as “valid”.
However, we dovalidate all generated atoms in
δ-SNLI-TEST , since non-monotonic reasoning does
not give rise to clear constraints between an original
problem and its constituent atomic sub-problems.
Our two-step validation process involves pruning
decompositions with a strong, finetuned NLI model
followed by human validation.
Pruning. For each example in δ-SNLI-TEST , we
use a DEBERT A-large model finetuned on popular
NLI datasets2and remove all generated atoms that
are not entailed by the hypothesis. By design, P-H
pairs in δ-SNLIhave a neutral relation, and updates
strengthen or weaken propositions in the hypoth-
esis. Hence, we run a secondary pruning stage to
retain only those atoms that are notentailed by
the premise (see Table 5). See Appendix A for a
discussion of coverage.
Human Validation. An author annotated all
atoms that survived pruning as either invalid or
2MNLI (Williams et al., 2018), Fever-NLI (Thorne et al.,
2018), Adversarial NLI (Nie et al., 2020), LingNLI (Parrish
et al., 2021), and WANLI (Liu et al., 2022)

--- PAGE 4 ---
Premise ( P) Hypothesis ( H) Update ( U) Atoms
A man in a white t-shirt
and jeans is holding a mal-
let and chisel next to his
abstract sculpture which
stands on several bricks.A man is trying to
finish his sculpture
for a churchThe man has taken
his first strike against
the granite.
(Weakener)a1:The thing the person is trying to do is finish. (-1)
a2: The thing the person is trying to finish is a sculpture. (+1)
a3: The sculpture is for a church. (0)
There is a green trash
truck in road with a person
sweeping sidewalk.The garbage man
sweeps up where
the can spilled.The person is wear-
ing a city uniform.
(Strengthener)a1:The person is a garbage man. (+2)
a2: The thing being swept is up. (invalid)
a3: There is a can. (0)
a4: The can has spilled. (+1)
a5:The person is sweeping up a spill. (+2)
Two young men climb a
tree overlooking a rural
setting, with one of them
out far on a limb and
clutching a white helmet.Two brothers are
climbing a tree to
get down their Fris-
bee. (N)N/A a1: There are two people. (E)
a2: There are two people who are brothers. (N)
a3: There are people climbing. (E)
a4: There are people climbing a tree. (E)
a5: There is a purpose for people climbing a tree. (N)
a6:The purpose for people climbing a tree is to get something. (N)
a7: The thing people are trying to get is a Frisbee. (N)
a6: The thing people are trying to get is down. (invalid)
A father and his daugh-
ter are riding a lawn
mower down a street while
dressed in American col-
ors.two men cut grass
by hand (C)N/A a1: There are two people. (E)
a2: There are two people who are men. (C)
a3: There are people cutting. (E)
a4: There are people cutting grass. (E)
a5: There is a method of cutting grass. (E)
a6: The method of cutting grass is by hand (C)
Table 1: δ-SNLI(Rows 1 and 2) and SNLI (Rows 3 and 4) instances, along with atomic decompositions of
hypotheses and the label of the sub-problem involving that atom.
valid (see Table 1 for examples of invalid atoms).
Valid δ-SNLIatoms had to (1) be grammatical, (2)
entail from H, (3) not entail from P. Atoms intro-
ducing new information were considered invalid,
including those that were pragmatic inferences of
H(Jeretic et al., 2020; Srikanth et al., 2024b).
95.7% of pruned atoms were determined as valid
by the author annotator. An external annotator also
annotated a sample of 100 atoms for validity for
an agreement of κ= 0.82measured by Cohen’s
Kappa (Cohen, 1960). The remaining analysis in
this work is done on the set of valid δ-SNLIatoms.
4 Atoms in Traditional NLI
While performing strongly on various benchmarks,
LLMs still struggle with many types of consistency
including paraphrastic consistency (Srikanth et al.,
2024a; Verma et al., 2023), hypothetical consis-
tency (Chen et al., 2023), or even preferential con-
sistency (Zhao et al., 2024). When LLMs make
entailment judgments, another desirable property
islogical consistency . Namely, when an LLM it-
self deems a set of atoms a1...anentailed by H,
we can hold it accountable to maintain consistency
between its judgments on each ( P,ai) sub-problem
and its overall ( P,H) judgment in a logical way.
This gives us necessary, but not sufficient, evidence
to help signal that it has “understood” the situation.4.1 Atomic and Overall Label Consistency
We construct a set of rules to establish the rela-
tionship between atomic sub-problems and overall
problem labels.
1.IfHis entailed by P: Each valid aimust be
entailed by P.
2.IfHcontradicts P: At least one valid aimust
contradict P.
3.IfHis neutral with respect to P: At least one
valid aimust be neutral with respect to P, all
others may be either neutral or entailed.
4.2 Experimental Setup
We experiment with six LLMs: gpt-4o (Ope-
nAI, 2024), gpt-4o-mini (OpenAI, 2024),
gpt-3.5-turbo-0125 (Ouyang et al., 2022),
llama-3-8b-instruct (Dubey et al., 2024),
llama-3-70b-instruct (Dubey et al., 2024), and
gemma-2-9b-instruct (Team et al., 2024).
First, we benchmark each models’s performance
onSNLI-TEST -SAMPLE original examples (Ta-
ble 2) using Prompt B.1 adapted from Liu et al.
(2023). We use 12 in-context original SNLIex-
amples from the dev split evenly distributed over
the three NLI labels. Then, for each SNLI-TEST -
SAMPLE example, we have each model predict the
relation between Hand each generated atom ai
from §3.1 using the same prompt and exemplar set.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Full Example
AccuracyOverall Logical
ConsistencyConsistency on
Correct ExsConsistency on
Incorrect ExsLogical Consistency by Label Induced Atom
Label Accuracy entailment neutral contradiction
gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 89.8 84.0 86 .8 59 .8 78 .8 90 .1 82 .6 81 .3
gpt-4o-2024-08-06 88.5 87.9 89 .6 74 .8 88.9 92 .7 79 .2 81 .9
llama-3-70b-it 87.7 84 .2 89 .5 46 .3 82 .1 81 .3 89 .5 84.8
llama-3-8b-it 85.2 81 .2 88 .2 41 .2 76 .0 85 .0 85 .1 82 .9
gemma-2-9b-it 84.2 80 .9 85 .9 54 .4 84 .0 82 .4 73 .8 78 .9
gpt-35-turbo-0125 82.1 74 .4 80 .4 46 .9 70 .4 90 .9 64 .2 74 .9
Table 2: Accuracy (col. 1) and logical consistency of LLMs full SNLI examples (col. 2). We also report logical
consistency on examples where the full prediction was correct (col. 3) and incorrect (col 4.), as well as stratify by
predicted label (cols. 5–7). Finally, we logically compose atomic sub-problem labels to see if this more interpretable
method outperforms full example accuracy (col. 8).
For each atom that the LLM predicts as entailed,
we have it predict the relation between Pandai
using the same prompt and exemplar set.
We report overall logical consistency as the per-
cent of examples where the full prediction was
logically consistent with the predicted labels for
sub-problems as dictated by the rules in §4.1.
Results. Despite higher accuracy numbers,
LLMs seem to struggle with logical consistency
(Table 2). Interestingly, a model’s accuracy is not
fully indicative of its logical consistency. When
models incorrectly predict the full example’s la-
bel, they are more prone to logical inconsistencies
between atomic sub-problems and the full prob-
lem (Table 2, Columns 3 and 4). Though not the
top performing model, gpt-4o outperformed other
models on logical consistency even on examples
where its full prediction was incorrect . Such logi-
cal consistency indirectly captures the reliability of
a model’s full prediction: when two LLMs achieve
similar accuracies, logical consistency serves as
another point of comparison.
We also stratify our results by the predicted over-
all label and report logical consistency within each
class (Table 2, Columns 5—7). All models exhibit
consistency gaps within the 3 labels , and different
models struggle with different example classes.
Lastly, we experiment with atomic infer-
ence (Stacey et al., 2024), or inducing an overall
label via logical rules over the predicted atomic
sub-problem labels, to understand whether a set-
ting in which models only provide granular infer-
ences can be more effective. We induce an overall
label with similar logical rules to those in §4.1: (1)
if all aiare predicted as entailed by P, we pre-
dict entailment, (2) if at least one aiis predicted
as contradicting P, we predict a contradiction, (3)
otherwise, predict neutral. While this strategy does
not yield competitive performance with full exam-ple accuracy (Table 2, Column 1 versus Column 8),
it does offer a more interpretable framework for
LLMs that otherwise seem to struggle with logical
consistency. Atom judgments may more difficult
than overall judgments for a variety of reasons (see
Appendix B.1), and in turn, inducing a label from
individual atomic predictions may be less reliable.
5 Atoms in Defeasible Inference
We now turn to defeasible inference to explore how
atomic sub-problems can help us better understand
the complexities of the task, model performance,
and the knowledge evaluated in the δ-SNLIdataset.
In traditional NLI (§4), labels of atomic sub-
problems function like terms in an equation—the
overall relation between PandHcan be computed
from strict logical rules over relations between P
and individual ai. In contrast, defeasible inference
functions akin to fuzzy logic (Castro et al., 1998).
Determining the overall effect of the update Uon
Hinvolves a softer weighing of the direction and
magnitude of its effect on each atom.
For example, consider the second row in Table 1.
A human reading the update U(“The person is
wearing a city uniform” ) would conclude that U
strengthens their belief in H(“The garbage man
sweeps up where the can spilled” ) as opposed to
weakens it. Looking at this problem through the
lens of atomic decomposition helps pinpoint why.
Hconsists of five atoms, each representing pieces
of evidence notpresent in Pripe for targeting by
updates. Two of the five atoms are most strongly
supported by U: the person is wearing a city uni-
form strongly strengthens our belief that they may
be a garbage man ( a1) as well as that they may
be sweeping up a spill ( a5). However, Uhas no
effect on our belief that there is a can in the sce-
nario ( a3). The co-occurrence of a1anda5com-
pound the strengthening effect, leading to an over-
all strengthening effect of UonH.

--- PAGE 6 ---
dnli.snli.test.25 
P: A group of people performing on a stage. 
H: A group of people are singing and dancing on 
stage for people 
weak strengthener 
 strong weakener 
U: The people on stage gesture in sign language. 
neutral 
dnli.snli.test.128 
P: A young man in an orange hat walks his 
bicycle down the street. 
H: A man broke his new bike. 
U: The bike chain is dragging on the ground. 
strong strengthener 
 weak weakener 
strong weakener 
 weak weakener 
dnli.snli.test.87 
P: A group of people are outside working. 
H:  Construction workers are building something. 
strong weakener 
U: The people are using lawn mowers. 
dnli.snli.test.64 
P: Lady in black skirt is getting excited. 
H: Lady is excited after winning a contest 
U: The lady is holding a large golden cup. 
strong strengthener 
 strong strengthener 
The people 
are building.
There is 
something 
being built.
The 
people are 
construction 
workers.
weak weakener 
strong weakener 
The group 
is singing.
The group 
is dancing.
There are 
people watching 
the group
The person 
has won 
something
The thing 
won 
is a contest.
The bike is new . 
The person 
broke the bike. 
Figure 2: A rug plot visualization of 1,761 δ-SNLIinstances and their corresponding distribution of atomic sub-
problem labels. Each vertical slice represents one full δ-SNLIinstance. Slice color (red or green) represents the
full instance label (weakener or strengthener). For each δ-SNLIproblem, we manually label each corresponding
atomic sub-problem on a -2 (strongly weakens) to +2 (strongly strengthens) scale. Each vertical slice uses shading
(light/dark) to represent the resulting distribution of atomic sub-problem labels (-2 to +2). Slices are ordered left to
right by proportion of weakener labels, showing relatively high separation between red and green instances. When
atomic sub-problems contain a mix of positive and negative labels, the full problem label may be a strengthener or a
weakener, as illustrated by the two center-most exemplars.
Breaking down δ-SNLIhypotheses and form-
ing atomic sub-problems in this manner gives us a
framework to understand the intricacies of defea-
sible inference. We begin by benchmarking recent
LLMs to understand the state of defeasible infer-
ence capabilities of models. Then, we introduce the
idea of a critical atom , or the primary piece of in-
formation an update acts on. Finally, we use critical
atoms as a way to better understand and interpret
model behavior, as well as argue that critical atoms
serve as a useful representation for measuring the
type of knowledge evaluated in δ-SNLI.
5.1 Understanding Defeasible Inference with
Atomic Sub-Problems
Benchmarking LLMs on δ-NLI.We benchmark
a suite of recent models on full examples from δ-
SNLI-TEST , including encoder models and prompt-
based models, open-source and proprietary sys-
tems, as well as models of various sizes. We fine-
tune encoder-only models ( roberta-large and
deberta-v3-large ) on the train set of δ-SNLIfor
2 epochs with a learning rate of 2e-5 and a batch
size of 32. For all prompt-based models, we do few-
shot evaluation with Prompt C.1 and 10 in-context
examples evenly split between strengtheners and
weakeners.
Many of the models in our suite surpass the hu-
man performance benchmarked by Rudinger et al.
(2020), with gpt-4o as the top performing model
at 92% accuracy (Table 3). However, since it re-
mains unclear whether this accuracy is indicative of
a holistic understanding of situations in δ-SNLI, weturn to studying performance on the atomic reason-
ing problems that compose each δ-SNLIexample
to better contextualize these results.
Annotating Atoms. Each atomic sub-problem
inδ-SNLIis(P, ai, U)tuple capturing the effect
of the update on a specific atom ai. An author
annotated all valid (as determined in §3.2) atomic
sub-problems for each example in δ-SNLI-TEST ac-
cording to the five-point scale used in Rudinger
et al. (2020) for validation (Table 5) ranging from
strongly weakens (-2) to strongly strengthens (+2)
with a midpoint value of no effect (0) for atoms
on which Uhad no effect. The same external an-
notator from §3.2 annotated a random sample of
100valid atomic sub-problems on the same -2 to
+2 scale (Appendix E), obtaining an agreement of
τ= 0.79with Kendall’s Tau (Kendall, 1938).
Ground Truth Label Distribution. Figure 2 vi-
sualizes the label distribution ( −2to+2) of atomic
sub-problems of each δ-SNLI-TEST example as a
thin vertical strip. Strips are green if the origi-
nal example is a strengthener and red for weaken-
ers. While some examples have all atomic labels
of the same polarity, a significant chunk of the
dataset includes atomic sub-problems with no
effect or the opposite polarity . Examples depicted
across the spectrum in Figure 2 illustrate the non-
monotonicity of defeasible inference.
Atomic Sub-Problem Performance. We first
measure the performance of models on atomic
sub-problems using annotated ground-truth labels.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Full Example
AccuracyAtom
AccuracyCritical Atom
AccuracyP(Full ✓| Critical ✓) P(Full ✓| Critical ✗)
llama-3-8b-it 80.1 65 .3 77 .0 90 .9 45 .9
gpt-3.5-turbo 81.5 66 .1 76 .4 91 .8 49 .7
gemma-2-9b-it 82.3 68 .5 72 .1 91 .9 60 .5
Human 83.6 – – – –
gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 86.9 74 .8 79 .4 93 .1 66 .4
roberta-large 87.4 83 .4∗87.8∗94.0 44 .9
llama-3-70b-it 88.0 73 .8 81 .9 93 .6 64 .5
deberta-v3-large 91.1 87.4∗91.5∗95.0 55 .5
gpt-4o-08-06 92.6 77.2 83 .5 96 .5 75 .5
Table 3: LLM accuracies on full δ-SNLI examples (col. 1), all atomic sub-problems (col. 2), and just critical atom
sub-problems (col. 3), using our manual atomic labels. We also report full δ-SNLI example accuracy conditioned
on accurate (col. 4) and inaccurate (col. 5) prediction of the corresponding critical atom sub-problem label.
The original δ-SNLIdataset was designed as a bi-
nary prediction task. However, as Figure 2 depicts,
updates may also have no effect on atoms. We
adapt Prompt C.1 to accommodate this ternary task
(Prompt C.2) and use atoms in exemplars instead
of full hypotheses. Since the train set of δ-NLIonly
admits binary labels, we reuse the finetuned models
(deberta androberta ), and report atom accuracy
on non-neutral atoms (80% of atoms, Figure 5).
Across the board, models perform worse on
atomic sub-problems than on full examples (Ta-
ble 3, Column 2). Since updates often act on mul-
tiple parts U(Table 1), we hypothesize that this
compounding effect may contribute to higher per-
formances on full examples.
We observe that some atomic sub-problems are
more critical contributors to the overall effect of U
onH. Consider the example in row 2 of Table 1.
Since Uacts most strongly on a1anda5,we can
assume that they are critical in determining the
overall effect of UonH, and correctly understand-
ing the effect of Uona3ora4is not essential to
the overall problem. We formalize this below.
5.2 Critical Atoms as Questions Under
Discussion (QUD)
As established, updates vary in which atom they
most strongly affect. Consider Hand the three up-
dates in Figure 3. Each Utargets a distinct (or crit-
ical) atom without having an effect on the others.
We formalize this notion by recognizing that hy-
potheses (or more broadly, sentences in discourse)
serve as an answer to a large space of possible ques-
tions: all three questions in the right-most column
could be answered with H. However, when up-
dates target particular atoms, the strategy by which
they do so favors a particular question Q, making
it more likely that His the answer to Qas opposed
to any other question.
Hypothesis: A man in an orange  vest stands  on a dock .
Atom Example Update H answers this QUD 
a1The vest that the 
person wears is 
orange .The vest is made 
from purple  yarn. What color  is the 
vest that the man is 
wearing? 
a2The person 
stands .His folded  legs  rest 
on the ground. What is the man 
doing  on the dock? 
a3The person is 
on a dock .The man smiles 
while on his boat .
Where  is the man? Figure 3: Updates ( U) may act on the same hypothesis
Hin different ways by targeting different atoms. Here,
eachUstrongly targets a different atom, while having
no effect on the other atoms derived from H(e.g. the
Uin the first row has no effect on a3in the last row).
We refer to the atom(s) which an update most strongly
affects as the “critical” atom of the (P, H, U )δ-NLIex-
ample. Critical atoms help identify the question under
discussion of the example.
These questions function as questions under dis-
cussion (QUD), a well-studied linguistic phe-
nomenon (Benz and Jasinskaja, 2017). The update
“The man smiles on his boat” has no effect on the
atom about vest color and hence does not pick out
the QUD associated with that atom. We call the
atoms above the critical atom for each correspond-
ing update, as they uniquely pick out particular
QUDs over others. Critical atoms correspond to
the particular inference or piece of knowledge a
defeasible NLI example aims to test. As such, we
use them as a framework to measure consistency
as well as the diversity of the δ-SNLIdataset. This
formulation of QUDs relates to question answering-
based semantics (He et al., 2015; Pyatkin et al.,
2021; Klein et al., 2022) in which QA pairs capture
semantic information, such as semantic roles.
Identifying Critical Atoms of Updates. In order
to identify the critical atom for a defeasible NLI
example, we identify the subset of its valid atoms
with the strongest labels that match its overall po-
larity. The majority of δ-SNLI-TEST examples have

--- PAGE 8 ---
one critical atom (Figure 6), but it is possible for
example to have multiple if the effect is equally
strong, as in row 2 of Table 1.
Performance on Critical Atomic Sub-Problems
versus Full Examples. Across the board, models
are stronger on the subset of critical atomic sub-
problems than on all atomic problems (Table 3).
We hypothesize that LLMs may be better at mod-
eling stronger, direct inferences such as those in
critical sub-problems, but may struggle when the
effects are indirect or weaker.3Such nuanced dis-
tinctions require a robust understanding of the mul-
tiple factors that control the underlying inference, a
skill that even larger models seem to struggle with.
We also measure the probability that a model
correctly predicts the label for the full example
given that it has correctly (Column 4) and incor-
rectly (Column 5) solved all critical atomic sub-
problems (Table 3). Correctly solving all atomic
sub-problems is a strong indicator that a model is
likely to predict the full problem correctly. How-
ever, some models still have as high as a 75% prob-
ability of predicting the full answer even having
incorrectly predicted critical sub-problems, call-
ing into question the robustness of their reasoning
process in the face of such inconsistency.
6 Measuring Inferential Consistency in
δ-NLI
As established, identifying the critical atom(s) of
aδ-NLIexample allows us to pinpoint the knowl-
edge or fact that the example is designed to eval-
uate (§5.2). The two different examples in Fig-
ure 4 share the same critical atom, representing
two different contexts under which the model must
directly evaluate the fact “The people are friends. ”
A model correctly predicting whether or not people
are friends under some contexts but not others may
indicate that it has not fully understood the factors
that influence the inference. Because they contain
independent examples, few datasets accommodate
measuring a model’s inferential consistency (IC),
or the likelihood that its prediction for a particular
inference will remain consistently correct or incor-
rect under different contexts (here, contexts refers
to different (P, U)pairs). Correctly drawing an
inference under a single context does not guarantee
3For example, Uin Row 2 of Table 1 has no effect on a3,
but that effect is slightly strengthened upon mention of a spill
ina4, since donning a city uniform is likelier at spill sites.
  The people are friends. 
Context 1 
P: T wo men cooking, 
one stirring a pot 
while making a funny 
face while the other 
points at him. 
U:  A picture of the two 
men is on the fridge 
behind them. 
gpt-4o 
gemma-2-9b 
llama-3-8b 
Context 2 
P: A middle-aged man 
is talking to another 
middle-aged man in a 
light blue tee-shirt. 
U: One man just won a 
golf tournament and is 
being interviewed. 
gpt-4o 
gemma-2-9b 
llama-3-8b 
Figure 4: Grouping examples by their critical atom(s)
allows us to understand under which contexts (P+U)
a model has understood a piece of knowledge. Here,
we show two δ-NLIexamples that evaluate the same
atom (top): one that strengthens it (left), and one that
weakens it (right). A model that truly understands a fact
and the factors that influence it (or, conversely does not)
should yield consistently correct or incorrect predictions.
However, some models have mixed accuracy among
examples targeting the same atom, indicating that they
only understand the inference under some contexts.
that the model will make a correct prediction for
the same inference under a different context.
To quantify this, we group examples in δ-SNLI-
TEST by their critical atom and report the inferential
consistency of different models.
How many unique critical atoms does δ-SNLI-
TEST evaluate? While δ-SNLIcontains around
2K test examples and 88K training examples, how
many distinct critical atoms underlie those exam-
ples? We quantify this by identifying semantically
equivalent critical atoms in δ-SNLI-TEST by em-
bedding each atom with NV-Embed-7B (Lee et al.,
2024) and then computing pairwise cosine similar-
ity between all critical atoms. We construct a graph
Gwhere nodes correspond to critical atoms and
edges are drawn between nodes if their similarity is
above a threshold ( θ= 0.75) and they are bidirec-
tionally entailed as determined by the NLI model
in §3.2. Finding semantically equivalent groupings
then reduces to finding all maximal cliques (Tomita
et al., 2006) in G.
The 1,761 δ-SNLI-TEST examples that contain at
least one valid atom (from 193 unique P-Hpairs)
contain 429 unique atoms.4Following the pro-
cedure above yields 349 unique cliques, or 349
unique critical atoms .5We bucket examples by
4Note that the number of unique atoms is upper-bounded
by the S NLIhypotheses that δ-SNLIbuilds upon.
5We also experiment with generating the QUDs (Ap-
pendix D) for each critical atom and find that δ-SNLI-

--- PAGE 9 ---
these cliques, resulting in groups of examples that
share a critical atom (which we call critical atom
buckets , or just buckets , represented as
 ). We
find that certain critical atoms arise frequently: top
critical atoms include “The others are friends of
the person” (21 examples) or “The person is a man”
(20 examples).
Measuring Inferential Consistency ( IC).
Srikanth et al. (2024a) introduce paraphrastic
consistency , a metric capturing the probability
that a model’s prediction for two paraphrases of
the same NLI problem remain consistent (both
incorrect or both correct). We adapt this metric to
compute a model’s inferential consistency , or the
probability that its predictions for two defeasible
NLI examples eiandejthat share the same
critical atom are either both correct or incorrect.
As in Srikanth et al. (2024a), we define two terms:
•R
: a discrete random binary variable repre-
senting whether a model’s prediction for a full
δ-NLIexample is correct (1) or incorrect (0).
•θ
:E[R
], or the average correctness (i.e.,
accuracy) of the δ-NLIexamples in a particu-
lar critical atom bucket.
For a binary classification task ( y∈ {0,1}) and a
model M, we define ICas
IC=P(M(ei) =y, M(ej) =y)| {z }
prob. of both predictions correct+
P(M(ei)̸=y, M(ej)̸=y)| {z }
prob. of both predictions incorrect(1)
We estimate ICdirectly from the accuracies of
critical atom buckets as:
IC=E[θ2
] +E[(1−θ
)2] (2)
Note that δ-NLIexamples can have multiple critical
atoms (Figure 6). In these cases, we divide the
weight of the example eacross all critical example
buckets that share ewhen computing θ
.
Results. All models exhibit room for improve-
ment in inferential consistency (Table 4), giving
us a sense of how well the LLMs we analyze have
internalized the critical atomic facts evaluated in
δ-SNLI-TEST . One source of inconsistency we ob-
serve arises when certain contexts (premise-update
pairs) demand more implicit reasoning or back-
ground knowledge. For example, consider two
TEST evaluates 223 unique QUDs, around an 81% coverage
of the available atoms.ModelInferential
Consistency
llama-3-8b-it 74.5
gpt-3.5-turbo 75.8
gemma-2-9b-it 76.5
gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 81.7
roberta-large 82.6
llama-3-70b-it 83.5
deberta-v3-large 87.0
gpt-4o-08-06 88.7
Table 4: Inferential consistency of models ( IC) onδ-
NLIexamples. We group examples that share the same
critical atom and compute the probability that two ex-
amples in the same group were both incorrectly or both
correctly predicted by a model.
different contexts under which the model must eval-
uate the same critical atom “The people are tall” :
Context 1: P: Four people standing on a hiking trail in
a forest with big tree logs on the ground, U: Their long
legs step across several logs at once.
Context 2 P: Two men in orange uniforms stand before
a train and do some work, U: They can easily touch the
top of the train.
Several models struggle to draw the strengthening
inference under the first context, but all models that
we analyze successfully draw the strengthening
inference under the second.
These analyses help us understand whether mod-
els understand pieces of knowledge and the factors
that influence them, raising interesting questions
about how best to collect updates to increase the
coverage of a fact or situation. Defeasible rea-
soning systems must be able to deftly modulate
inferences in a manner that is sensitive to diverse
contexts. Future work may leverage the identifi-
cation of critical atomic sub-problems to nudge
annotators toward underrepresented critical atoms
or contexts.
7 Conclusion
Hypothesis decomposition allows us to measure
the logical consistency of models as well as better
understand the structure of non-monotonic reason-
ing. We find that labels of atomic sub-problems in
defeasible reasoning share a more complex relation
to the full problem than in traditional NLI, even
within the same label class. We introduce critical
atoms as the primary fact evaluated by a defeasible
NLI example, enabling us to group examples by
shared critical atoms and measure the inferential
consistency of LLMs across different contexts.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Limitations
This paper uses LLMs to generate atomic decom-
positions of hypotheses. While we did validate
whether or not generated atoms were valid during
manual annotation for δ-SNLI, we did not deter-
mine whether each family had missing decompo-
sitions of a particular granularity for SNLI-TEST -
SAMPLE .
Both δ-NLI and SNLI have been shown to
contain annotation artifacts (Gururangan et al.,
2018), or particular statistical patterns between
hypotheses (in the case of SNLI) and updates (in
the case of δ-NLI). While prompt-based models
are not directly trained on any of the datasets,
the performance of finetuned roberta-large and
deberta-v3-large may be inflated by the pres-
ence of annotation artifacts in update sentences.
However, our methodology provides an opportu-
nity for the collection of updates free from these
artifacts by collecting updates that indirectly or
lightly affect on hypotheses.
Finally, since the original train set of δ-NLIdoes
not contain “no effect” or “neutral” updates, we
report metrics for finetuned models on the sub-
set of non-neutral atomic sub-problems. Future
work may augment δ-NLIfinetuning data with con-
textual neutral atomic sub-problems (akin to hard
negatives in information retrieval) to enable this
predictive ability in finetuned models.
Acknowledgments
We thank the anonymous reviewers as well as the
members of the University of Maryland CLIP lab
for their thoughtful and thorough feedback. We
also thank Joe Stacey for feedback on an earlier
draft of this paper. This work was supported by
NIH Award No. R01MD016037 (Srikanth) and
NSF CAREER Award No. 2339746 (Rudinger).
The content is solely the responsibility of the au-
thors and does not necessarily represent the official
views of the National Institutes of Health or the
National Science Foundation. The funders had no
role in study design, data collection and analysis,
decision to publish, or preparation of the paper.
References
Anton Benz and Katja Jasinskaja. 2017. Questions
under discussion: From sentence to discourse.
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-tated corpus for learning natural language inference.
InProceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
632–642, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Héctor-Neri Castañeda. 1967. Comments on d. david-
son’s ‘the logical form of action sentences’.
Juan Luis Castro, Enric Trillas, and Jose Manuel Zurita.
1998. Non-monotonic fuzzy reasoning. Fuzzy Sets
and Systems , 94(2):217–225.
Angelica Chen, Jason Phang, Alicia Parrish, Vishakh
Padmakumar, Chen Zhao, Samuel R Bowman, and
Kyunghyun Cho. 2023. Two failures of self-
consistency in the multi-step reasoning of llms. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.14279 .
Jifan Chen, Grace Kim, Aniruddh Sriram, Greg Durrett,
and Eunsol Choi. 2024. Complex claim verification
with evidence retrieved in the wild. In Proceedings
of the 2024 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long
Papers) , pages 3569–3587, Mexico City, Mexico. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Jaemin Cho, Yushi Hu, Roopal Garg, Peter Ander-
son, Ranjay Krishna, Jason Baldridge, Mohit Bansal,
Jordi Pont-Tuset, and Su Wang. 2023. Davidsonian
scene graph: Improving reliability in fine-grained
evaluation for text-image generation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.18235 .
Jacob Cohen. 1960. A coefficient of agreement for
nominal scales. Educational and psychological mea-
surement , 20(1):37–46.
David Dowty. 1991. Thematic proto-roles and argument
selection. language , 67(3):547–619.
Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey,
Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman,
Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela
Fan, et al. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.21783 .
Maxwell Forbes, Jena D Hwang, Vered Shwartz,
Maarten Sap, and Yejin Choi. 2020. Social chem-
istry 101: Learning to reason about social and moral
norms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.00620 .
Danilo Giampiccolo, Bernardo Magnini, Ido Dagan, and
William B Dolan. 2007. The third pascal recognizing
textual entailment challenge. In Proceedings of the
ACL-PASCAL workshop on textual entailment and
paraphrasing , pages 1–9.
John Glover, Federico Fancellu, Vasudevan Jagan-
nathan, Matthew R. Gormley, and Thomas Schaaf.
2022. Revisiting text decomposition methods for
NLI-based factuality scoring of summaries. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Natural Language
Generation, Evaluation, and Metrics (GEM) , pages
97–105, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates (Hybrid).
Association for Computational Linguistics.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Suchin Gururangan, Swabha Swayamdipta, Omer Levy,
Roy Schwartz, Samuel Bowman, and Noah A. Smith.
2018. Annotation artifacts in natural language infer-
ence data. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, Volume 2 (Short Papers) , pages 107–112,
New Orleans, Louisiana. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Luheng He, Mike Lewis, and Luke Zettlemoyer. 2015.
Question-answer driven semantic role labeling: Us-
ing natural language to annotate natural language.
InProceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
643–653, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Paloma Jeretic, Alex Warstadt, Suvrat Bhooshan, and
Adina Williams. 2020. Are natural language infer-
ence models IMPPRESsive? Learning IMPlicature
and PRESupposition. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 8690–8705, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Ryo Kamoi, Tanya Goyal, Juan Diego Rodriguez, and
Greg Durrett. 2023. WiCE: Real-world entailment
for claims in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 2023
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing , pages 7561–7583, Singapore. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Divyansh Kaushik, Eduard Hovy, and Zachary Lipton.
2019. Learning the difference that makes a differ-
ence with counterfactually-augmented data. In Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations .
Maurice G Kendall. 1938. A new measure of rank
correlation. Biometrika , 30(1-2):81–93.
Ayal Klein, Eran Hirsch, Ron Eliav, Valentina Pyatkin,
Avi Caciularu, and Ido Dagan. 2022. QASem pars-
ing: Text-to-text modeling of QA-based semantics.
InProceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
7742–7756, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Chankyu Lee, Rajarshi Roy, Mengyao Xu, Jonathan
Raiman, Mohammad Shoeybi, Bryan Catanzaro, and
Wei Ping. 2024. Nv-embed: Improved techniques for
training llms as generalist embedding models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.17428 .
Alisa Liu, Swabha Swayamdipta, Noah A. Smith, and
Yejin Choi. 2022. WANLI: Worker and AI collabora-
tion for natural language inference dataset creation.
InFindings of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 , pages 6826–6847, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Hanmeng Liu, Ruoxi Ning, Zhiyang Teng, Jian Liu, Qiji
Zhou, and Yue Zhang. 2023. Evaluating the logical
reasoning ability of chatgpt and gpt-4. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.03439 .Bill MacCartney. 2009. Natural language inference .
Stanford University.
Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis,
Wen-tau Yih, Pang Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke Zettle-
moyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. FActScore:
Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual precision
in long form text generation. In Proceedings of the
2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing , pages 12076–12100, Singa-
pore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ani Nenkova and Rebecca Passonneau. 2004. Evaluat-
ing content selection in summarization: The pyramid
method. In Proceedings of the Human Language
Technology Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
HLT-NAACL 2004 , pages 145–152, Boston, Mas-
sachusetts, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Yixin Nie, Adina Williams, Emily Dinan, Mohit Bansal,
Jason Weston, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Adversarial
NLI: A new benchmark for natural language under-
standing. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics ,
pages 4885–4901, Online. Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
OpenAI. 2024. Hello gpt-4o: A new model for openai’s
future. Accessed: 2024-10-13.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al.
2022. Training language models to follow instruc-
tions with human feedback. Advances in neural in-
formation processing systems , 35:27730–27744.
Alicia Parrish, William Huang, Omar Agha, Soo-Hwan
Lee, Nikita Nangia, Alexia Warstadt, Karmanya Ag-
garwal, Emily Allaway, Tal Linzen, and Samuel R.
Bowman. 2021. Does putting a linguist in the loop
improve NLU data collection? In Findings of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2021 , pages 4886–4901, Punta Cana, Dominican Re-
public. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Terence Parsons. 1990. Events in the semantics of en-
glish: A study in subatomic semantics.
Ethan Perez, Patrick Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Kyunghyun
Cho, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Unsupervised question
decomposition for question answering. In Proceed-
ings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) , pages
8864–8880, Online. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Valentina Pyatkin, Paul Roit, Julian Michael, Yoav Gold-
berg, Reut Tsarfaty, and Ido Dagan. 2021. Asking
it all: Generating contextualized questions for any
semantic role. In Proceedings of the 2021 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing , pages 1429–1441, Online and Punta Cana,
Dominican Republic. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Raymond Reiter. 1980. A logic for default reasoning.
Artificial intelligence , 13(1-2):81–132.
Rachel Rudinger, Vered Shwartz, Jena D. Hwang, Chan-
dra Bhagavatula, Maxwell Forbes, Ronan Le Bras,
Noah A. Smith, and Yejin Choi. 2020. Thinking like
a skeptic: Defeasible inference in natural language.
InFindings of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: EMNLP 2020 , pages 4661–4675, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Maarten Sap, Ronan Le Bras, Emily Allaway, Chan-
dra Bhagavatula, Nicholas Lourie, Hannah Rashkin,
Brendan Roof, Noah A Smith, and Yejin Choi. 2019.
Atomic: An atlas of machine commonsense for if-
then reasoning. In Proceedings of the AAAI con-
ference on artificial intelligence , volume 33, pages
3027–3035.
Neha Srikanth, Marine Carpuat, and Rachel Rudinger.
2024a. How often are errors in natural language
reasoning due to paraphrastic variability? Transac-
tions of the Association for Computational Linguis-
tics, 12:1143–1162.
Neha Srikanth and Rachel Rudinger. 2022. Partial-
input baselines show that NLI models can ignore
context, but they don’t. In Proceedings of the 2022
Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies , pages 4753–4763, Seattle,
United States. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Neha Srikanth, Rupak Sarkar, Heran Mane, Elizabeth
Aparicio, Quynh Nguyen, Rachel Rudinger, and
Jordan Boyd-Graber. 2024b. Pregnant questions:
The importance of pragmatic awareness in mater-
nal health question answering. In Proceedings of
the 2024 Conference of the North American Chap-
ter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long
Papers) , pages 7253–7268, Mexico City, Mexico. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Joe Stacey, Pasquale Minervini, Haim Dubossarsky,
Oana-Maria Camburu, and Marek Rei. 2024. Atomic
inference for NLI with generated facts as atoms.
InProceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empir-
ical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
10188–10204, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Joe Stacey, Pasquale Minervini, Haim Dubossarsky, and
Marek Rei. 2022. Logical reasoning with span-level
predictions for interpretable and robust NLI models.
InProceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
3809–3823, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Gemma Team, Thomas Mesnard, Cassidy Hardin,
Robert Dadashi, Surya Bhupatiraju, Shreya Pathak,
Laurent Sifre, Morgane Rivière, Mihir Sanjay Kale,
Juliette Love, et al. 2024. Gemma: Open modelsbased on gemini research and technology. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.08295 .
James Thorne, Andreas Vlachos, Christos
Christodoulopoulos, and Arpit Mittal. 2018.
FEVER: a large-scale dataset for fact extraction
and VERification. In Proceedings of the 2018
Conference of the North American Chapter of
the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long
Papers) , pages 809–819, New Orleans, Louisiana.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Etsuji Tomita, Akira Tanaka, and Haruhisa Takahashi.
2006. The worst-case time complexity for generating
all maximal cliques and computational experiments.
Theoretical computer science , 363(1):28–42.
Dhruv Verma, Yash Kumar Lal, Shreyashee Sinha, Ben-
jamin Van Durme, and Adam Poliak. 2023. Evalu-
ating paraphrastic robustness in textual entailment
models. In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 2: Short Papers) , pages 880–892, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Miriam Wanner, Seth Ebner, Zhengping Jiang, Mark
Dredze, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2024. A
closer look at claim decomposition. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.11903 .
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018. A broad-coverage challenge corpus for sen-
tence understanding through inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
1 (Long Papers) , pages 1112–1122, New Orleans,
Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
Yating Wu, Ritika Mangla, Greg Durrett, and
Junyi Jessy Li. 2023. QUDeval: The evaluation of
questions under discussion discourse parsing. In Pro-
ceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Meth-
ods in Natural Language Processing , pages 5344–
5363, Singapore. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Moy Yuan and Andreas Vlachos. 2024. Zero-shot fact-
checking with semantic triples and knowledge graphs.
InProceedings of the 1st Workshop on Knowledge
Graphs and Large Language Models (KaLLM 2024) ,
pages 105–115, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Xiutian Zhao, Ke Wang, and Wei Peng. 2024. Mea-
suring the inconsistency of large language models in
preferential ranking. In Proceedings of the 1st Work-
shop on Towards Knowledgeable Language Models
(KnowLLM 2024) , pages 171–176.

--- PAGE 13 ---
SNLI δ-SNLI
# test examples 1000 1837
label distr 36/32/32% (E/C/N) 50/50% (S/W)
# unique hypotheses 1000 203
# unique generated atoms 3263 475
# unique valid atoms – 429
# unique atomic sub-problems 3263 4079
% strengtheners – 46.0
% weakeners – 31.4
% no effect – 22.6
# unique critical atoms – 349
Table 5: Dataset statistics for both S NLIandδ-SNLI.
Model Proportion
llama-3-8b-it 32.0
gpt-3.5-turbo 31.1
gemma-2-9b-it 25.5
gpt-4o-mini-2024-07-18 34.5
llama-3-70b-it 33.3
gpt-4o-08-06 27.6
Table 6: Proportion of examples in SNLI-TEST -
SAMPLE (1000 examples) depending on a completeness
assumption of atom generation.
A Atom GenerationPrompt A.1: Atom Generation
Prompt: You are an expert linguist. You are
given a sentence . Generate a list of atomic
facts that are strictly logically entailed from
the given sentence . Keep each fact independent
and self-contained. Each fact should make sense
when read on its own. Only write facts that are
directly described or supported by the sentence .
End your response with [END].
SENTENCE: { sentence }
FACTS:
A.1 Coverage of Generated Atoms
Generated atoms must cover the information pre-
sented in the hypothesis. For example, for the hy-
pothesis Hin Figure 1, an atom generation model
should produce atoms covering all three pieces of
information: at least one mentioning professional ,
actors , and summer . Pruning should not reduce the
coverage of the atom set. Here, we estimate the
completeness, or coverage, of the generated atoms
with respect to the hypothesis of NLI examples.
Completeness in the case of SNLI. We note that
completeness of atoms only matters in particular
cases. When the overall P-Hpair is predicted by
the model to be entailed, the logical consistency
check does not rely on completeness, as no sin-
gle atom, if predicted by the model to be entailed,
should be predicted as anything other than entail-
ment. However, there are two possible scenarios ofinconsistency when P−His predicted to be neu-
tral: (a) All atoms were predicted to be entailed by
P (this does necessitate ensuring completeness), or
(b) one or more atoms is predicted to be a contradic-
tion (this does not require ensuring completeness).
Consistency when P-His predicted to be a contra-
diction does require checking that all atoms cover
the hypothesis. Table 6 shows the proportion of ex-
amples in SNLI-TEST -SAMPLE that are dependent
upon a completeness assumption as per the descrip-
tion for each label above. These help contexualize
our results in Table 2 by estimating an upper bound
of logical consistency.
To measure completeness in SNLI, we randomly
sample 50 SNLI examples and annotate for com-
pleteness, and find that in 49/50 examples, all
pieces of information from the original hypothesis
project into at least one atom. The only example in
our random sample that was missing an atom was
for the hypothesis shown in Table 8.
We also sample another set of 50 random ex-
amples from SNLI-TEST -SAMPLE where one of
our models ( gpt-4o-2024-08-06 ) predicted either
contradiction or neutral and where consistency
failed in order to understand of what percentage of
errors are due to actual failures in consistency or are
simply due to lack of completeness. Here, we study
the atoms that the model deemed entailed from the
hypothesis for each example, and annotate whether
those cover all pieces of information in the hy-
pothesis. In 6/50 examples, gpt-4o-2024-08-06
incorrectly judged that at least one of the generated
atoms was not entailed by the hypothesis, hence
omitting it and causing a completeness issue for
the set of atoms over which we measure its logical
consistency. However, we find that of these six
cases, only two examples were missing an atom
in the set of generated atoms, again indicating that
ouratom generation process reliably projects all
information from the hypothesis into the generated
set of atoms.
Completeness in the case of δ-NLI.We manu-
ally validated all generated 4,079 atomic subprob-
lems in the entire test set of δ-SNLI-TEST . Lack of
completeness is most likely when none of the atoms
have a gold label in the direction of the gold label
of the overall example, indicating that an atom may
be missing. This happens in only 3% of examples
(70/1761) in δ-SNLI-TEST . We annotate these 70
examples to understand whether or not an atom
was indeed missing after our automatic pruning

--- PAGE 14 ---
ExamplePremise: A female within the foreground is heading towards a large
white colored pillar that is apart of a large building with people are
loitering or waiting on the steps of said building.
Hypothesis The woman has an important meeting today in the build-
ing.
Update The woman is wearing a janitor’s uniform ( weakener )Atomsa1: The person has something (0, no effect).
a2: The thing the person has is a meeting. (0, no effect)
a3: The meeting is important (0, no effect)
a4: The meeting is today (0, no effect)
a5: The meeting is in a building (0, no effect)
Table 7: An example of a lack of completeness in gen-
erated atoms.
HypothesisThe man and woman are going to a movie in the city.Atomsa1: There are two people.
a2: There are two people who are a man and a woman.
a3: There are people going.
a4: There are people going to a movie.
a5: There is a destination for the people going.
a6: The destination is a movie.
a7: There is a city.
a8: The people are going to the city.
Table 8: An example of a lack of completeness in gen-
erated atoms for SNLI. Here the missing atom is “The
movie is in the city. ”
step. We find that in only 28 of the 70 examples
(representing only 1% of allexamples), at least
one atom was missing. Most of the cases where
none of the atoms have a gold label in the direction
of the gold label of the overall example are cases
where the original example is flawed in some way
(hinges on some stereotype, ambiguous language,
faulty reasoning, or the original crowdworker who
wrote the update did not understand the instruc-
tions) and our annotations do not propagate the
flawed assumptions or reasoning from the original
example. Table 7 shows an example. The origi-
nal gold label propagates a stereotype or attitude
towards janitors (i.e it is less likely they have an
important meeting if they are a janitor). We choose
not to propagate such attitudes or stereotypes in our
annotation, hence, all atoms have the “no effect”
label.B SNLI
Prompt B.1: Traditional NLI
Prompt: You will be given a premise and a
hypothesis about that premise . You need to
decide whether the hypothesis is entailed by
the premise by choosing one of the following
answers: ’e’: The hypothesis follows logically
from the information contained in the premise .
’c’: The hypothesis is logically false from
the information contained in the premise . ’n’:
It is not possible to determine whether the
hypothesis is true or false without further
information. Read the premise and hypothesis
and select the correct answer from the three
answer labels (e, n, c). Also provide a single
line of explanation in a new line. End your
response with [END] and output nothing after.
Premise: {premise}
Hypothesis:{hypothesis}
Is the hypothesis entailed by, contradicted by,
or neutral with respect to the premise?
B.1 Inconsistency in SNLI
We analyze the set of randomly selected sample
of 50 examples from Appendix A.1 where one of
our models ( gpt-4o-2024-08-06 ) was logically
inconsistent. We find that inconsistencies arise for
a number of reasons, some of which we discuss
here.
Misjudgment of atom entailment from the hy-
pothesis. Measuring logical consistency in SNLI
examples happens in two phases (1) the model de-
termines whether the atom entails from the hypoth-
esis, and (2) the model predicts the relationship
between the premise and an atom. Depending on
its strength, we find that there are inconsistencies
that arise from the model’s misjudgment of atom
entailment. For example:
Premise: A man on a bicycle, wearing cycle gear, riding
at a fast past down paved trail surrounded by tree’s and
grass.
Hypothesis The man is riding on the sidewalk.
Generated Atoms (a1) There is a person. ( a2) There is
a person who is a man. ( a3) There is a person riding. ( a4)
There is a person riding on something. ( a5) The thing the
person is riding on is a sidewalk.
Based on the full premise and hypothesis,
gpt-4o-2024-08-06 predicted that the hypothe-
sis was neutral in relation to the premise. However,
in its atomic predictions between the premise and
each atom, the model incorrectly determined that
the last atom was not entailed by the hypothesis,
and hence it was not included in the set of atoms

--- PAGE 15 ---
that were used to measure consistency. It judged
all other atoms as entailed from the premise, hence
leading to the model behaving inconsistently in this
example.
Use of hypernyms in atoms. We make sure to
include hypernyms of entities in the set of atomic
facts. For example, “the man dances” is decom-
posed into “there is a person”, “the person is a
man”, “the person dances” . In some cases, models
have difficulty on premise-atom judgments where
the premise uses the hyponym (“man”) and the
hypothesis uses the hypernym (“person”).
Out of domain syntactic constructions. The
syntactic structures of many of our atoms differ,
in some cases significantly, from the constructions
in the original dataset. For example “the thing the
person is eating is a sandwich” is a pseudo-cleft
construction that is very rare in the SNLI dataset.
As such, some sentences are out of domain for en-
coder models that were trained on SNLI or prompt-
based models that have inadvertently seen SNLI
training data in pretraining corpora.
Weaker effects based on annotation elicitation.
Both SNLI and defeasible NLI are datasets created
by crowdworkers writing hypotheses and updates
conditioned on a label. One of the consequences
of this process is that hypotheses and updates tend
to strongly express the desired label. In contrast,
atoms tend to express labels in a softer way, and
their effects often compound when taken together.
As such, these atoms may be out of distribution as
compared to hypotheses that express the label with
a higher magnitude. Since the effect of each atom
is lighter than when they are taken together in a full
sentence, atomic judgments are sometimes much
more difficult than overall judgments.
Co-reference Effects. In some cases, atomic gen-
erations remove some of the implicit co-reference
between the hypothesis and premise. We observe
that changing the co-reference in atoms can result
in inconsistencies between the overall example and
each premise-atom judgment.C Defeasible NLI
Prompt C.1: Defeasible Inference
Prompt: You are a reasoning system. You
are given a description of a situation and a
hypothesis about that situation that may or may
not be true. Given some more evidence about
the situation , output ’more’ if the hypothesis
seems more likely to be true after learning the
evidence , or output ’less’ if the hypothesis
seems less likely to be true after learning
the evidence . Also provide a single line of
explanation in a new line. End your response
with [END] and output nothing after.
Situation: {context}
Hypothesis: {hypothesis}
Evidence: {evidence}
Does the evidence make the hypothesis
about the situation more or less likely to be
true?
Prompt C.2: Defeasible Inference Atoms
Prompt: You are a reasoning system. You
are given a description of a situation and a
hypothesis about that situation that may or may
not be true. Given some more evidence about
the situation , output ’more’ if the hypothesis
seems more likely to be true after learning
the evidence , output ’less’ if the hypothesis
seems less likely to be true after learning the
evidence , or output ’none’ if the likelihood of
the hypothesis remains unchanged after learning
the evidence . Also provide a single line of
explanation in a new line. End your response
with [END] and output nothing after.
Situation: {context}
Hypothesis: {hypothesis}
Evidence: {evidence}
Does the evidence make the hypothesis
about the situation more or less likely to be
true?
D QUD Generation for Understanding
Diversity
In order to generate QUDs from critical atom
propositions, we use gpt-4o-2024-08-06 with a
temperature of 0.01 and 15 exemplars of critical
atom to QUD mappings along with Prompt D.1.
For example, the critical atom The dog is brown.
translates to the QUD What color is the dog? Ex-
emplars include critical atoms that do not use gener-
ics (e.g.“girl”) mapped to QUDs that use generics
(“person”). This is to make sure that similar in-
ferences are correctly mapped to the same QUD.
Table 9 shows examples of QUDs generated by the

--- PAGE 16 ---
Critical Atom QUD
The kids are waiting. What are the people doing?
The dog is brown. What color is the dog?
The thing the grandpa is wearing is a shirt. What is the person wearing?
The two women are sisters. What is the relationship between the two people?
The bike is brand new. What is the condition of the object?
The girls are posing. What are the people doing?
Table 9: QUDs generated from critical atoms in δ-SNLI-TEST bygpt-4o-2024-08-06 .
2
 1
 0 1 2
Atom Label020406080100% of atoms in -NLI test
22.4%
9.0%22.6%
16.7%29.3%Atom Label Distribution ( -NLI)
Figure 5: Distribution of fine-grained labels across all
atoms in δ-SNLI-TEST .
model. We validate all generated QUDs by asking
an external annotator if the QUD can be answered
by the critical atom sentence, and find that in 92%
of cases, the QUD generated by gpt4o correctly
captures the critical atom.
Prompt D.1: QUD Generation
Prompt: You are an expert linguist. Given
a short sentence , generate a question that
is answered by the sentence. Read the
whole sentence carefully before generating the
question.
Sentence : critical atom
Question :
E Validation Instructions
Since atomic sub-problems mirror the original val-
idation task for defeasible inference, we use the
instructions provided to annotators from Rudinger
et al. (2020) to ensure alignment.
1 2 3 4 5 6
Number of Atoms0255075100% of examples33.9%
27.8%
20.2%
11.1%5.3%1.7%Atom Count ( -NLI)
1 2 3 4 5 6
Number of Critical Atoms0255075100% of examples66.8%
23.9%
6.8%2.0% 0.5%Figure 6: Number of atoms (top) and number of critical
atoms (bottom) per example in δ-SNLI-TEST .
0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0
proportion of valid atoms used as critical atoms020406080100% of examples in -NLI test
0.5%7.8%10.3%
1.0%19.4%
6.6%
1.3% 0.5%52.6%Proportion of Valid Atoms used as Critical Atoms Per Example ( -NLI)
Figure 7: Proportion of valid atoms used as critical
atoms per update in δ-SNLI-TEST . 52% of updates
target all valid possible atoms at once in a single update
sentence.
