# 2508.01680.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: ./document-conflict/2508.01680.pdf
# File size: 1696284 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
T-GRAG: A Dynamic GraphRAG Framework for Resolving
Temporal Conflicts and Redundancy in Knowledge Retrieval
Dong Li∗
arvinlee826@gmail.com
School of Mathematics, Harbin
Institute of Technology
Harbin, ChinaYichen Niu∗
School of Astronautics, Harbin
Institute of Technology
Harbin, China
niu62@stu.hit.edu.cnYing Ai
School of Astronautics, Harbin
Institute of Technology
Harbin, China
Xiang Zou
School of Mathematics, Harbin
Institute of Technology
Harbin, ChinaBiqing Qi†
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence
Laboratory
Shanghai, ChinaJianxing Liu†
School of Astronautics, Harbin
Institute of Technology
Harbin, China
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong perfor-
mance in natural language generation but remain limited in knowle-
dge-intensive tasks due to outdated or incomplete internal knowl-
edge. Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) addresses this by
incorporating external retrieval, with GraphRAG further enhancing
performance through structured knowledge graphs and multi-hop
reasoning. However, existing GraphRAG methods largely ignore the
temporal dynamics of knowledge, leading to issues such as tempo-
ral ambiguity, time-insensitive retrieval, and semantic redundancy.
To overcome these limitations, we propose Temporal GraphRAG
(T-GRAG), a dynamic, temporally-aware RAG framework that mod-
els the evolution of knowledge over time. T-GRAG consists of five
key components: (1) a Temporal Knowledge Graph Generator that
creates time-stamped, evolving graph structures; (2) a Temporal
Query Decomposition mechanism that breaks complex temporal
queries into manageable sub-queries; (3) a Three-layer Interactive
Retriever that progressively filters and refines retrieval across tem-
poral subgraphs; (4) a Source Text Extractor to mitigate noise; and
(5) a LLM-based Generator that synthesizes contextually and tempo-
rally accurate responses. We also introduce Time-LongQA, a novel
benchmark dataset based on real-world corporate annual reports,
designed to test temporal reasoning across evolving knowledge. Ex-
tensive experiments show that T-GRAG significantly outperforms
prior RAG and GraphRAG baselines in both retrieval accuracy and
response relevance under temporal constraints, highlighting the
necessity of modeling knowledge evolution for robust long-text
question answering. Our code is publicly available on the T-GRAG.
CCS Concepts
•Knowledge Index and Retrieval →Temporal Knowledge
Base ;Knowledge Management and Storage ; GraphRAG.
Keywords
Temporal GraphRAG, Knowledge Index and Retrieval, GraphRAG,
Knowledge Conflict
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
†The corresponding author of this research.1 Introduction
With the significant breakthroughs achieved by large language
models [ 17], such as GPT [ 2], LLAMA [ 4] in the field of natural
language processing (NLP), text generation tasks based on these
models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in a variety of ap-
plication scenarios. However, in complex tasks that require specific
domain knowledge or external information, these models are often
limited by outdated knowledge and insufficient content accuracy
[21]. To address this issue, the Retrieval-Augmented Generation
(RAG) method has emerged [ 6]. In recent years, the RAG framework
has continued to evolve, giving rise to various variants. Among
them, GraphRAG [ 5], which constructs a graph index and performs
retrieval at the node level, has broken through the limitations of
traditional RAG methods based on text similarity. It has shown out-
standing performance in multi-hop reasoning [ 9,12] and long-text
question-answering tasks [ 11], and has thus attracted widespread
attention. However, in real-world applications, knowledge is not
static but continuously evolves over time [ 8,13,14]. The incremen-
tal update mechanism of the existing GraphRAG is merely a simple
stacking of graph information, without considering the temporal
evolution characteristics of the graph [ 16]. As the knowledge base
continues to expand, GraphRAG faces three key challenges.
Challenge 1: Temporal ambiguity in knowledge model-
ing leads to indexing errors. In real-world scenarios, knowledge
evolves over time. An entity may exhibit different attributes at dif-
ferent time points—for instance, a company’s net cash flow, product
delivery volume, or organizational structure may vary across years
[15]. However, existing GraphRAG methods often disregard such
temporal characteristics when constructing the knowledge graph
or building indexable embeddings. As a result, time-specific facts
are merged under a single entity node without explicit temporal
separation, leading to temporal ambiguity in the representation.
This modeling oversight prevents GraphRAG from distinguishing
between facts that are semantically similar but temporally distinct.
For example, as illustrated in Figure 1, multiple automobile delivery
records associated with Audi Group are included in the graph, but
their respective years are not encoded. Consequently, when the
model encounters a knowledge entry such as "1.8 million units deliv-
ered, " it cannot determine whether this figure refers to 2022 or 2023,
making it difficult to provide accurate and temporally grounded

--- PAGE 2 ---
MM ’25, October 27–31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland Dong Li et al.
Figure 1: An example of a GraphRAG retrieval failure due
to temporal evolution of knowledge and node redundant
knowledge.
responses. This issue originates from the construction phase, where
time-awareness is lacking in both graph structure and node-level
embedding.
Challenge 2: Time-insensitive retrieval introduces irrel-
evant results. Even when temporal information is available in
the knowledge graph, current GraphRAG retrieval mechanisms
typically fail to leverage it effectively during the search process.
Specifically, the retrieval stage often prioritizes semantic similarity
while ignoring the temporal constraints embedded in the user query.
As a result, the system may retrieve information that is topically rel-
evant but temporally mismatched. For instance, as shown in Figure
1, when a user asks for Audi Group’s vehicle deliveries in 2012 or
2022, the system may still retrieve data from 2023 if it shares similar
semantic context. This occurs because the model does not treat the
query’s temporal reference as a hard constraint or retrieval signal.
Such behavior leads to inaccurate or misleading outputs, especially
in domains where temporal consistency is critical (e.g., financial
reporting, historical analysis). Unlike Challenge 1, this issue arises
at the retrieval stage, where the system fails to align the search
results with the query’s temporal intent.
Challenge 3: Redundant information at the same time
point disrupts semantic relevance in retrieval. Even when the
knowledge is correctly aligned with a specific time point, chal-
lenges remain due to semantic redundancy within individual nodes.
A single entity at a given timestamp may be associated with a wide
range of heterogeneous information—some of which may be irrele-
vant to the user’s query. When such diverse knowledge is densely
embedded into a single node, it can dilute the node’s semantic rep-
resentation and compromise retrieval accuracy. For example, as
shown in Figure 1, the node representing Audi Group in 2022 may
include multiple types of facts: vehicle delivery statistics, financialperformance, organizational changes, and more. While all of this in-
formation belongs to the same time frame, not all of it is relevant to
a specific query. Suppose a user is interested only in Audi’s vehicle
delivery volume in 2022. If the node’s representation is dominated
or distorted by unrelated financial information, the resulting em-
bedding may appear less similar to the query. As a consequence,
the node may be ranked lower or even excluded during retrieval.
In order to address the above challenge, we propose Tempo-
ral GraphRAG (T-GRAG) , a general, dynamic, and precise tem-
poral GraphRAG method. The T-GRAG mainly consists of five
plug-and-play modules: Temporal Knowledge Graph Generator,
Temporal Query Decomposition, Three-layer Interactive Retriever,
Valid Source Text Extractor, and Augmented Generator based on
LLM.
In the indexing phase, the temporal knowledge graph genera-
tor constructs a time-aware knowledge graph in which each node,
edge, and associated fact is annotated with temporal attributes. This
design enables fine-grained differentiation of knowledge across dif-
ferent time periods. During the retrieval phase, the time query
decomposer first breaks down complex queries containing multi-
ple temporal constraints into simpler sub-queries, each focusing
on a single time condition, thereby reducing retrieval complexity.
These sub-queries are then processed by a Three-layer Interactive
Retriever, which consists of a temporal subgraph retriever, a coarse-
grained node retriever, and a fine-grained knowledge retriever.
Specifically, the temporal subgraph retriever extracts subgraphs at
the relevant time points, preventing retrieval errors and conflicts
arising from temporal evolution. The coarse-grained node retriever
encodes both the query and the nodes within the subgraph, calcu-
lates their semantic similarity, and selects the top-n most relevant
nodes as candidates. Building on this, the fine-grained knowledge
retriever matches the query to knowledge associated with the can-
didate nodes and identifies the top-k most relevant pieces of infor-
mation, while marking the corresponding nodes as relevant. Based
on the selected nodes, the valid source text extractor retrieves the
top-t supporting texts, effectively filtering out noise introduced by
redundant or outdated knowledge. In the enhancement generation
phase, the retrieved subgraph information and source texts are fed
into a large language model (LLM)-augmented generator, which
integrates these inputs to produce the final answer.
To evaluate the performance of RAG methods in handling long-
text question answering tasks with temporal knowledge bases, we
constructed a dataset called Time-LongQA Dataset . The dataset is
derived from the company’s annual reports, as these reports contain
a large amount of temporal evolution knowledge, and most of the
content is unseen by LLMs. The questions cover four types of time
constraints, single time, dual time, multiple time ( ≥3time points),
and no time. We designed an automated process for generating and
manually validating QA pairs, extracting 2,292 question-answer
pairs. Based on this dataset, we conducted multiple experiments
on GraphRAG, Vanilla RAG, and T-GRAG, demonstrating the ef-
fectiveness of T-GRAG in temporal long-text question answering
tasks.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
•Temporal GraphRAG (T-GRAG) : We propose a novel dy-
namic retrieval-augmented generation framework that constructs
and utilizes temporal knowledge graphs. This design addresses the

--- PAGE 3 ---
T-GRAG: A Dynamic GraphRAG Framework for Resolving Temporal Conflicts and Redundancy in Knowledge Retrieval MM ’25, October 27–31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland
challenge of temporal ambiguity in traditional GraphRAG systems,
enabling time-sensitive indexing and retrieval.
•Temporal Query Decomposition (TQD) : We introduce a
query decomposition strategy that splits complex queries with mul-
tiple time constraints into simpler single-time sub-queries. This
effectively avoids inference confusion across time periods and nar-
rows the retrieval space, reducing query complexity.
•Three-layer Interactive Retriever : We design a hierarchical
retriever consisting of a temporal subgraph retriever, coarse-grained
node retriever, and fine-grained knowledge retriever. This structure
mitigates retrieval errors caused by temporal mismatch and node-
level semantic redundancy, improving precision and granularity of
retrieval.
•Time-LongQA Dataset : We construct a high-quality long-text
QA dataset with diverse temporal constraints derived from real-
world company reports. The dataset reflects knowledge evolution
across time and enables fair and challenging evaluation of temporal
retrieval systems. T-GRAG achieves state-of-the-art performance
on this benchmark.
2 Temporal GraphRAG
In this section, we provide a detailed introduction to the five key
modules of T-GRAG: Temporal Knowledge Graph Generator, Tem-
poral Query Decomposition, Three-layer Interactive Retriever, Valid
Source Text Extractor, and LLM Augmented Generator. The overall
pipeline of T-GRAG is illustrated in Fig.2.
2.1 Temporal Knowledge Graph Generator
To meet the temporal evolution requirements of textual knowledge
bases, we have designed a generator with dynamic updating capa-
bilities. We first divide the temporal source text knowledge base
𝐷𝑇into multiple time periods {𝐷𝑡1,𝐷𝑡2,...,𝐷𝑡𝑛}, facilitating the
modeling of temporal evolution. Then, we split the text in each time
period𝐷𝑡𝑖into fixed-sized text blocks {𝑑𝑡𝑖
1,𝑑𝑡𝑖
2,...,𝑑𝑡𝑖𝑐}which serve
as the processing units. Next we use LLM to extract graph informa-
tion. First, we identify all entities in the text blocks, including the
entity’s name, type, and description. Then, we identify the relation-
ships between related entities, clarifying the relationship type and
description between source and target entities. Since the semantic
information of the knowledge graph mainly resides in the descrip-
tions of entities and relationships, we define these descriptions
as knowledge. Meanwhile, we introduce temporal attributes into
entities and relationships and associate the corresponding times-
tamp𝑡𝑖with knowledge 𝑘to distinguish knowledge of the same
entity at different time points. During the process of updating the
graph, knowledge with the latest timestamp is continuously added
to entities and relationships, avoiding confusion with past knowl-
edge. Finally, we construct temporal dynamic graph knowledge
base𝑇𝐺=(E,R). Each entity 𝑒𝑇𝑖
𝑖∈Eis defined as
𝑒𝑇𝑖
𝑖={𝑘𝑡𝑖
1,𝑘𝑡𝑖
2,...,𝑘𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑡𝑖|𝑡𝑖∈𝑇𝑖} (1)
where𝑇𝑖denote the time attribute of entity 𝑒𝑖,𝑘𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑡𝑖denote knowl-
edge of𝑒𝑖occurring at time 𝑡𝑖.Algorithm 1 Temporal GraphRAG (T-GRAG)
1:Input: Temporal text knowledge base 𝐷𝑇, query𝑄
2:Output: Final answer Answer final
3:Step 1: Temporal Knowledge Graph Generation
4:foreach time period 𝐷𝑡𝑖in𝐷𝑇do
5: Split𝐷𝑡𝑖into text blocks{𝑑𝑡𝑖
1,...,𝑑𝑡𝑖𝑐}
6: foreach block𝑑𝑡𝑖
𝑗do
7: Extract entities and relations with LLM
8: Add temporal attributes and knowledge to graph 𝑇𝐺
9: end for
10:end for
11:Step 2: Temporal Query Decomposition
12:ifQuery𝑄has temporal constraints then
13: Decompose 𝑄into subqueries{𝑞𝑡1,...,𝑞𝑡𝑞}by LLM
14:else
15: Subqueries ={𝑄}
16:end if
17:Step 3: Three-layer Interactive Retriever
18:foreach subquery 𝑞𝑡𝑖do
19: 3.1 Temporal Subgraph Retrieval
20: Retrieve subgraph 𝐺𝑡𝑖for𝑡𝑖from𝑇𝐺
21: Generate node embeddings 𝑧𝑒for𝐺𝑡𝑖
22: 3.2 Node Retrieval
23: Generate query embedding 𝑧𝑞for𝑞𝑡𝑖
24: Retrieve top-n relevant nodes 𝐸candidate by cosine similarity
25: 3.3 Knowledge Retrieval
26: Retrieve top-k relevant knowledge 𝐾valid from𝐸candidate
27: Identify valid nodes 𝐸valid
28: Step 4: Source Text Extraction
29: Score and select top-t source texts 𝐷valid
30: Step 5: LLM Augmented Generation
31: Generate answer 𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖=LLM(𝑞𝑡𝑖,𝐾valid,𝐷valid)
32: Store(𝑞𝑡𝑖,𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖)in All_answers
33:end for
34:Final Answer Generation
35:Answer final=LLM(𝑄,Í[𝑞𝑡𝑖,𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖])
36:return Answer final
2.2 Temporal Query Decomposition
Traditional GraphRAG retrieval typically provides LLMs with all
relevant temporal information at once, but mixing knowledge from
multiple time points may lead to reasoning confusion [ 20]. Addi-
tionally, if a query involves multiple temporal constraints, directly
retrieving a large-scale temporal subgraph can cause a sharp in-
crease in computational complexity and introduce unnecessary
noise.
To address these issues, we introduce the Temporal Query De-
composer (TQD), leveraging the strong temporal semantic aware-
ness of LLMs [ 10] to analyze, reason, and decompose temporal
constraints in queries. Specifically, given an original query 𝑄, TQD
first utilizes the LLM to identify and parse its temporal constraints.
If the query contains no temporal constraints, the original query
remains unchanged, implying that the question requires knowledge
spanning all time periods. However, if the query includes multiple

--- PAGE 4 ---
MM ’25, October 27–31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland Dong Li et al.
Figure 2: The the overall framework of T-GRAG.
temporal constraints, the LLM’s reasoning capability is used to de-
compose𝑄into multiple independent subqueries {𝑞𝑡1,𝑞𝑡2,...,𝑞𝑡𝑞},
where each subquery corresponds to a single time point.
2.3 Three-layer Interactive Retriever
To effectively address retrieval errors caused by the evolution of
temporal knowledge and redundant knowledge in nodes, we pro-
pose a Three-layer Interactive Retriever R. This retriever consists
of temporal subgraph retriever, coarse-grained node retriever, and
fine-grained knowledge retriever.
Temporal subgraph retriever ( R𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒):To avoid interference
from irrelevant time periods in the graph knowledge and prevent
knowledge conflicts, R𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 extracts subgraphs corresponding to the
time attributes in the query from the knowledge graph, ensuring
that each entity and relationship within the subgraph contains
only knowledge relevant to that specific time point. Specifically,
for a sub-temporal query 𝑞𝑡𝑖with a timestamp 𝑡𝑖, we retrieve the
temporal subgraph 𝐺𝑡𝑖from the temporal knowledge graph 𝑇𝐺,
where the nodes and relationships in 𝐺𝑡𝑖only contain knowledge
from the time point 𝑡𝑖. Each entity that only contains knowledge of
time𝑡𝑖is defined as 𝑒𝑡𝑖
𝑖∈𝐺𝑡𝑖.
𝑒𝑡𝑖
𝑖={𝑘𝑡𝑖
1,𝑘𝑡𝑖
2,...,𝑘𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑡𝑖} (2)
Additionally, we use a pre-trained embedding model (EM) to gen-
erate node embeddings for the 𝐺𝑡𝑖. Specifically, We encode all the
knowledge in the nodes to generate the node embedding library 𝑧𝑛for𝐺𝑡𝑖.
𝑧𝑒=EM(𝑒𝑡𝑖
𝑖)∈R𝑑(3)
where𝑑denotes the dimension of the output vector.
Coarse-grained node retriever ( R𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒) + Fine-grained knowl-
edge retriever (R𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒 ):The traditional GraphRAG retrieval
method performs retrieval only at the node level, which is ineffec-
tive at distinguishing the internal knowledge differences within
the nodes. Since nodes may contain a large amount of redundant
knowledge, simple node-level retrieval struggles to effectively dif-
ferentiate between valuable information and redundant content,
resulting in a decline in retrieval performance. Therefore, we pro-
pose an interactive method that combines the R𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 retriever with
theR𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒 retriever. The specific process is as follows:
First, we apply the same embedding strategy to subquery 𝑞𝑡𝑖to
ensure consistent processing of textual information.
𝑧𝑞=EM(𝑞𝑡𝑖)∈R𝑑(4)
R𝒏𝒐𝒅𝒆 : Subsequently, to identify the candidate nodes relevant
to the query, we use the nearest neighbor search method [ 1], where
cosine similarity is employed to measure the similarity between the
query embedding and node embeddings. The top-n most relevant
nodes are selected as the candidate nodes 𝐸𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒 for retrieval.
𝐸𝑐𝑎𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑒 =argtopn𝑒∈𝐸cos(𝑧𝑞,𝑧𝑒) (5)
Theargtopn operation retrieves the top-n elements based on this
similarity, providing a set of 𝐸𝑛considered most relevant to the
query.

--- PAGE 5 ---
T-GRAG: A Dynamic GraphRAG Framework for Resolving Temporal Conflicts and Redundancy in Knowledge Retrieval MM ’25, October 27–31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland
Figure 3: The left side shows the pipeline of finding TEK, while the right side presents an example of TEK.
R𝒌𝒏𝒐𝒘𝒍𝒆𝒅𝒈𝒆 : Next, we will extract valid knowledge from the
candidate nodes. Specifically, for each piece of knowledge within the
candidate nodes, we generate embeddings individually, employing
the same embedding strategy.
𝑧𝑘=EM(𝑘𝑡𝑖)∈R𝑑|𝑘𝑡𝑖∈𝐸𝑛(6)
Then, cosine similarity is used to measure the distance between
query and knowledge embeddings, selecting the top-k most similar
knowledge blocks as the valid knowledge 𝐾𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 .
𝐾𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑=argtopk𝑒∈𝐸cos(𝑧𝑞,𝑧𝑘) (7)
Ultimately, we will consider nodes containing 𝐾𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 as valid nodes
𝐸𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑
2.4 Valid Source Text Extractor
Previous GraphRAG retrieval methods offer significant advantages
by leveraging the topological structure of graphs and refining the
retrieval granularity to the node level. However, the knowledge
encapsulated within graph nodes and relationships may still be
incomplete relative to the original text. To address this, we identify
the most effective source texts based on the effective nodes extracted
by the three-layer retriever and their corresponding topological
information.
Specifically, we score the candidate source texts according to the
connectivity of the effective nodes and their neighboring nodes.
The more 1-hop neighboring nodes a text block contains, the higher
its score. Finally, the top-t source texts with the highest scores are
selected as the final valid source texts 𝐷𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 .2.5 LLM Augmented Generator
The valid graph information consists of the top-k relevant knowl-
edge𝐾𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 extracted from three layers of interactive knowledge
retrievers, as well as the relational knowledge 𝑅𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 associated
with valid nodes 𝐸𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 . This enables the LLM to understand the
topological information of retrieved subgraphs. Simultaneously,
the valid text information 𝐷𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑 includes the top-t relevant source
texts extracted by the valid source text retriever, ensuring that the
LLM has access to complete semantic context. The generator en-
hances the knowledge between these two perspectives to produce
accurate answers to the query.
𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖=𝐿𝐿𝑀(𝑞𝑡𝑖+𝐾𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑+𝑅𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑+𝐷𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑑) (8)
Ultimately, the original query, along with all sub-temporal queries
𝑞𝑡𝑖and their corresponding answers 𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖, aare fed into the LLM to
generate a comprehensive final answer.
𝐴𝑛𝑠𝑤𝑒𝑟𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 =𝐿𝐿𝑀(𝑄+∑︁
𝑡𝑖∈{𝑡1,...,𝑡𝑞}[𝑞𝑡𝑖,𝑎𝑛𝑡𝑖]) (9)
3 Time-LongQA Dataset
To construct a dataset of temporal evolution long texts while en-
suring that most of the data is unseen by the LLM, we selected
the publicly available Audi annual reports from 2012 to 2023 as
the base corpus. Using the MinerU tool [ 18], we converted the
source texts from PDF format to Markdown format, retaining only
the textual content. Subsequently, we designed an automated tem-
poral question-answer (QA) pairs construction process, which in-
cludes 1,538 single-time-constrained questions( 𝑄𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒 ), 524 dual-
time-constrained questions( 𝑄𝐷𝑢𝑎𝑙 ), 113 multi-time-constrained( ≥

--- PAGE 6 ---
MM ’25, October 27–31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland Dong Li et al.
3time points) questions( 𝑄𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖 ), and 117 non-time-constrained
questions(𝑄𝑁𝑜𝑛).The prompts for constructing dataset is detailed
in the Appendix C.
3.1 QA-pair Generation and Validation
First, we divided each annual report into text blocks of 2,000 tokens.
For𝑄𝐷𝑢𝑎𝑙 and𝑄𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖 , we developed a fully automated pipeline.
This pipeline first identifies temporal evolution knowledge (TEK)
within the temporal long texts and then generates questions involv-
ing two or more time points based on the extracted TEK. For 𝑄𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒
and𝑄𝑁𝑜𝑛, we utilized GPT-4 [ 2] to generate the corresponding
QA pairs. Finally, all generated QA pairs underwent manual valida-
tion, with particular attention paid to avoiding potential temporal
conflicts, especially when dealing with 𝑄𝑁𝑜𝑛 (such as changes in
Audi’s CEO).
3.2 How to Find TEK
Inspired by TCELongBench [ 24], we propose a TEK extraction pro-
cess based on LLMs. The pipeline and example are shown in the
figure3. The process is as follows: First, we generate summary rep-
resentations for all text blocks at each timestamp 𝑡𝑖to extract their
core content. Next, we use few-shot prompt to derive key points
from each text block’s summary. Subsequently, starting from the
key points of the most recent timestamp, we use cosine similarity
search to find the most similar key points in each previous times-
tamp with a similarity score above a threshold. Finally, we found
multiple TEK in a large number of annual reports.
4 Experiments
4.1 Experimental Setup
Baselines . We compare our proposed T-GRAG with three types
of baseline methods: Standard LLMs (Base LLM), Text Retrieval-
Augmented LLMs (Vanilla RAG) [ 7], and Graph Retrieval-Augmented
LLMs (GraphRAG) [5].
•Standard LLMs : This setting evaluates whether a language
model can answer questions solely based on its internal
knowledge, without access to any external data.
•Vanilla RAG : We use the original textual corpus as the
knowledge source, and employ a dense retriever to retrieve
relevant textual passages. The retrieved content is then pro-
vided as additional context to augment the LLM for question
answering.
•GraphRAG : We adopt the nano-GraphRAG pipeline [ 5] as
the GraphRAG baseline. In this setting, a graph-structured
knowledge base is first constructed from the original text.
Retrieval is then performed over this graph to obtain seman-
tically relevant subgraphs or nodes. The retrieved graph-
based content, along with the original text, is provided as
context to assist the LLM in generating accurate answers.
Nano-GraphRAG also supports incremental updates to the
graph, enabling dynamic knowledge integration.
For all baseline categories, we evaluate three LLM backbones:
LLaMA-3.1-70B-Chat [ 4], Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct [ 22], and LLaMA-
3.1-Nemotron-70B-Instruct-HF [19].Evaluation Metrics . We adopt language model-based metrics
to evaluate the quality of model responses, using Qwen2.5-72B to
assess their consistency with ground-truth answers. Each sample is
independently evaluated three times by the model, and a majority
voting strategy [ 3] is applied: the answer is considered correct
if at least two out of three evaluations deem it correct. The final
LLMscore is measured by answer accuracy. The prompts used for
LLM-based evaluation follow the DocBench protocol [ 25], with
more details provided in Appendix A.1.
Parameter Configuration . For all RAG-based methods, we
employ stella-en-1.5B-v5 [23] as the embedding model for dense
retrieval. The retrieval strategy over source text is parameterized by
the product of chunk size and top- 𝑡, with chunk size set to 1000 and
top-𝑡set to 5 in our main experiments. For GraphRAG and T-GRAG,
the total number of retrieved context tokens is limited to 1600
tokens. For T-GRAG specifically, we set the number of candidate
nodes (𝑛) to 30, and select the top- 𝑘most relevant knowledge units,
with𝑘=15, based on the graph retrieval scores.
4.2 Overall Performance
In this section, we perform a multi-dimensional comparison and
analysis of the overall performance results in Table 1.
T-GRAG vs Others. Among all LLM backbones, T-GRAG sig-
nificantly outperforms all baselines. In particular, the improvement
of T-GRAG in complex temporal constraints is more significant.
On𝑄𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒 , T-GRAG’s score improved by an average of 22.28 com-
pared to GraphRAG, and it improved by 34.05 and 47.2 on 𝑄𝐷𝑢𝑎𝑙 and
𝑄𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖 . This is because complex temporal constraints often intro-
duce more temporal redundant knowledge, reducing the accuracy
of the node retrieval. Experimental results robustly demonstrate
T-GRAG’s effectiveness in mitigating temporal retrieval errors. Ad-
ditionally, for 𝑄𝑁𝑜𝑛, T-GRAG also outperforms both Vanilla RAG
and GraphRAG, further validating the capability of its three-layer
interactive retrieval framework to enhance retrieval accuracy in
non-temporal tasks. The performance of Base LLMs is notably poor,
which demonstrates that the necessary knowledge to answer these
questions is not inherently contained within the LLM. The accu-
racy of the responses primarily depends on the ability to effectively
retrieve relevant text.
Graph RAG vs Vanilla RAG. Compared to Vanilla RAG, which
directly retrieves from the source text, GraphRAG features a more
complex pipeline and incurs higher computational costs. However,
our findings indicate that in certain cases, the performance of Graph
RAG is worse than Vanilla RAG. This observation substantiates our
argument in the introduction that the node embedding-based re-
trieval mechanism in traditional GraphRAG is less effective for com-
plex long-text scenarios, particularly in queries requiring localized
information. The primary reason lies in the excessive redundancy of
node knowledge, which impairs the retriever’s ability to accurately
extract the relevant local information. Our ablation study "Impact
of interactive retrieval between R𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 andR𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒 " further
demonstrates that the retrieval framework in T-GRAG effectively
mitigates this issue.

--- PAGE 7 ---
T-GRAG: A Dynamic GraphRAG Framework for Resolving Temporal Conflicts and Redundancy in Knowledge Retrieval MM ’25, October 27–31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland
Table 1: Model performance on Time-LongQA dataset comparing base LLMs, text retrieval augmented LLMs (Vanilla RAG),
graph retrieval augmented LLMs (Graph RAG), and T-GRAG.In the case of the same problem type and the same LLM backbone,
the increment of T-GRAG compared to the SOTA method will be displayed in red font.
Model Single-Time Dual-Time Multi-Time Non-Time
Base LLMsLLama-3.1-70b 9.36 9.13 12.05 9.00
Qwen-2.5-72b 2.53 4.97 3.37 3.50
Nemotron-3.1-70b 12.79 10.82 11.93 5.50
Llama3.2-8b-instruct 7.58 7.88 8.63 6.34
Vanilla RAGLLama-3.1-70b 59.36 35.11 30.97 64.10
Qwen-2.5-72b 64.69 50.95 46.01 68.37
Nemotron-3.1-70b 59.94 47.24 36.28 69.23
Llama3.2-8b-instruct 45.18 21.94 16.81 52.99
Graph RAGLLama-3.1-70b 50.25 20.03 14.15 67.52
Qwen-2.5-72b 62.28 37.91 33.62 80.34
Nemotron-3.1-70b 59.10 30.72 24.77 73.50
Llama3.2-8b-instruct 35.95 9.16 8.84 53.84
T-GRAGLLama-3.1-70b 78.1518.79↑ 58.7723.66↑ 69.0238.05↑ 71.794.27↑
Qwen-2.5-72b 78.1513.46↑ 63.7412.76↑ 69.9123.90↑ 81.190.85↑
Nemotron-3.1-70b 82.1822.24↑ 68.3221.07↑ 75.2238.94↑ 76.923.87↑
LLama3.2-8b-instruct 62.9317.75↑ 48.8526.91↑ 53.9837.17↑ 58.975.98↑
Figure 4: These three ablation experiments are conducted on three problem types: 𝑄𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒 ,𝑄𝐷𝑢𝑎𝑙 and𝑄𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖 , using the same
three LLM models as in the main experiment. The incremental parts are represented by pink bar charts and red font. (a) Results
comparsion between R𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 andR𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 +R𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒. (b) Results comparsion between R𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 +R𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒andR𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 +R𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒+R𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒 . (c)
Results comparsion between without TQD and with TQD.
4.3 Ablation Study
4.3.1 How important is Three-layer Interactive Retriever? To ef-
fectively verify the effectiveness of our retrieval mechanism, we
conduct two sets of ablation experiments to investigate the effective-
ness of T-GRAG’s core components: (1) the impact of the temporal
subgraph retrieverR𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 on answering time-sensitive queries; and
(2) the contribution of the interactive retrieval mechanism between
R𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 andR𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒 in enhancing retrieval accuracy and robust-
ness. All experiments are conducted using the same backbone LLM
(Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct) and retrieval configuration as in the main
setup. Detailed performance comparisons are illustrated in Figure 4.Effect of Temporal Retriever R𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒.To assess the role of tem-
poral awareness, we compare two variants: (a) a standard GraphRAG
pipeline using only R𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒, and (b) a temporal-aware version incor-
porating bothR𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 andR𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒. As shown in Figure 4(a), integrating
R𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 improves the overall answer accuracy by 19.31% on temporal
queries. This demonstrates that incorporating temporal subgraph
retrieval effectively reduces noise introduced by outdated or tem-
porally irrelevant content. By filtering information from unrelated
time slices,R𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 mitigates conflicts caused by temporal evolution,
thereby enhancing retrieval precision.
Effect of Interactive Retrieval Between R𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒andR𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒 .
We further examine whether the addition of R𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒 — which
retrieves fine-grained knowledge units associated with candidate

--- PAGE 8 ---
MM ’25, October 27–31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland Dong Li et al.
Figure 5: Performance of various RAG methods based on Qwen2.5-72b, Llama-3.1-70B and Llama-3.1-Nemotron-70B under
different numbers of retrieval units. Retrieve document parameters of 1, 3, and 5 respectively. We tested Vanilla RAG, Graph
RAG and T-GRAG on questions 𝑄𝑆𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒 ,𝑄𝐷𝑢𝑎𝑙 and𝑄𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖 .
Table 2: Under identical hardware and model configurations, the average inference time per query for T-GRAG and the baseline
GraphRAG.
Model Backbone Single-Time Dual-Time Multi-Time Non-Time
VanillaRAGLlama-70b 9.2 10.6 10.5 9.9
Llama-8b 1.3 1.5 1.6 1.2
GraphRAGLlama-70b 14.3 15.6 15.4 14.8
Llama-8b 3.4 3.6 3.6 3.2
T-GRAGLlama-70b 12.7 13.3 14.7 13.5
Llama-8b 2.4 2.8 3.1 2.6
nodes — can refine the retrieved context. We compare (a) a pipeline
using onlyR𝑡𝑖𝑚𝑒 andR𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒, and (b) a complete T-GRAG pipeline
that also incorporates R𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒 . The results in Figure 4(b) show
an average accuracy improvement of 5.81%. This indicates that themulti-level interactive retrieval mechanism helps reduce the inter-
ference of redundant node information by refining the granularity
of retrieved content. Even in non-temporal scenarios, R𝑘𝑛𝑜𝑤𝑙𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒
improves the model’s ability to extract relevant evidence from com-
plex knowledge graphs.

--- PAGE 9 ---
T-GRAG: A Dynamic GraphRAG Framework for Resolving Temporal Conflicts and Redundancy in Knowledge Retrieval MM ’25, October 27–31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland
Effect of Temporal Query Decomposition (TQD). To evalu-
ate the effectiveness of Temporal Query Decomposition (TQD) in
addressing multi-temporal constraint questions, we compare two
variants of T-GRAG: one with TQD enabled and one without. The
only difference between the two settings is the inclusion of the
TQD module. As shown in Figure 4(c), enabling TQD leads to a
performance gain of 5.79% on dual-time queries ( 𝑄𝐷𝑢𝑎𝑙 ) and 25.07%
on multi-time queries ( 𝑄𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖 ). These results demonstrate the sig-
nificance of TQD in improving model accuracy when handling
temporally complex questions. We attribute this improvement to
TQD’s ability to decompose questions into sub-queries with simpli-
fied temporal scopes, which not only reduces temporal reasoning
complexity but also avoids retrieval conflicts caused by inconsis-
tent time points. Moreover, TQD helps narrow the size of temporal
subgraphs, thereby enhancing the relevance and precision of sub-
sequent node and knowledge retrieval.
Impact of Retrieved Unit Count. To investigate the sensi-
tivity of model performance to the number of retrieved units, we
vary the retrieval configuration from 1000*5 (default) to 1000*3 and
1000*1. We evaluate three backbone LLMs: Qwen2.5-72B-Instruct,
LLaMA3.1-70B-Chat, and Nemotron-70B. The corresponding re-
sults are presented in Figure 5. As the number of retrieved units de-
creases, model performance declines across all methods. Specifically,
T-GRAG shows an average accuracy drop of 20.66%, GraphRAG
drops by 26.65%, and Vanilla RAG suffers the most with a 54.55%
reduction. Notably, T-GRAG and GraphRAG exhibit greater ro-
bustness to reduced retrieval context, particularly on temporally
demanding questions such as 𝑄𝐷𝑢𝑎𝑙 and𝑄𝑀𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑖 . This suggests that
graph-based retrieval strategies offer better resilience under con-
strained retrieval conditions. We hypothesize that this advantage
stems from the finer granularity of retrieval: while GraphRAG re-
trieves at the node level, T-GRAG further narrows the scope to
knowledge-level granularity within nodes, ensuring that critical
information is retained even with fewer retrieved segments.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we propose Temporal GraphRAG (T-GRAG), a novel
retrieval-augmented generation framework tailored for dynamic
knowledge bases. T-GRAG addresses key challenges such as tempo-
ral drift and knowledge redundancy, which often lead to retrieval
errors in evolving corpora. Our framework comprises five plug-
and-play modules that collaboratively enable temporally-aware
indexing, retrieval, and generation. Experiments on our newly con-
structed Temporal-Dataset, consisting of long-form corporate re-
ports with temporal evolution, show that T-GRAG consistently
outperforms GraphRAG and Vanilla RAG on long-text temporal
QA tasks. Notably, our Three-layer Interactive Retriever effectively
filters redundant knowledge, while the temporal query decompo-
sition module ensures accurate cross-time retrieval. These results
demonstrate that T-GRAG significantly improves both retrieval
precision and answer accuracy, laying a strong foundation for adap-
tive, temporally-aware RAG systems. We believe this work under-
scores the importance of incorporating temporal reasoning into
retrieval-based generation and opens new avenues for research in
time-sensitive knowledge modeling.6 Acknowledgement
This work is Supported by the National Key R&D Program of China
(2023YFC3305102) and Key Laboratory of Cognitive Intelligence and
Content Security, Ministry of Education (Grant no.RZZN202411).
We extend our gratitude to the anonymous reviewers for their
insightful feedback, which has greatly contributed to the improve-
ment of this paper.

--- PAGE 10 ---
MM ’25, October 27–31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland Dong Li et al.
References
[1]Mohammad Reza Abbasifard, Bijan Ghahremani, and Hassan Naderi. 2014. A
survey on nearest neighbor search methods. International Journal of Computer
Applications 95, 25 (2014).
[2]Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Floren-
cia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal
Anadkat, et al .2023. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774
(2023).
[3]Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde
De Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph,
Greg Brockman, et al .2021. Evaluating large language models trained on code.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 (2021).
[4]Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad
Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan,
et al. 2024. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783 (2024).
[5]Darren Edge, Ha Trinh, Newman Cheng, Joshua Bradley, Alex Chao, Apurva
Mody, Steven Truitt, and Jonathan Larson. 2024. From local to global: A graph
rag approach to query-focused summarization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16130
(2024).
[6]Yunfan Gao, Yun Xiong, Xinyu Gao, Kangxiang Jia, Jinliu Pan, Yuxi Bi, Yi Dai,
Jiawei Sun, and Haofen Wang. 2023. Retrieval-augmented generation for large
language models: A survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10997 (2023).
[7]Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin,
Naman Goyal, Heinrich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rocktäschel,
et al.2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 (2020), 9459–9474.
[8]Dong Li, Aijia Zhang, Junqi Gao, and Biqing Qi. 2024. An efficient memory module
for graph few-shot class-incremental learning. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 37 (2024), 130084–130108.
[9]Dong Li, Aijia Zhang, Huan Xiong, Biqing Qi, and Junqi Gao. 2025. FDphormer:
Beyond Homophily with Feature-Difference Position Encoding. ACM Transac-
tions on Knowledge Discovery from Data 19, 5 (2025), 1–19.
[10] Lei Liu, Shuo Yu, Runze Wang, Zhenxun Ma, and Yanming Shen. 2024. How
can large language models understand spatial-temporal data? arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.14192 (2024).
[11] Richard Yuanzhe Pang, Alicia Parrish, Nitish Joshi, Nikita Nangia, Jason Phang,
Angelica Chen, Vishakh Padmakumar, Johnny Ma, Jana Thompson, He He, and
Samuel Bowman. 2022. QuALITY: Question Answering with Long Input Texts,
Yes!. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the
Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies , Marine
Carpuat, Marie-Catherine de Marneffe, and Ivan Vladimir Meza Ruiz (Eds.).
Association for Computational Linguistics, Seattle, United States, 5336–5358.
doi:10.18653/v1/2022.naacl-main.391
[12] Boci Peng, Yun Zhu, Yongchao Liu, Xiaohe Bo, Haizhou Shi, Chuntao Hong, Yan
Zhang, and Siliang Tang. 2024. Graph retrieval-augmented generation: A survey.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08921 (2024).
[13] Biqing Qi, Xinquan Chen, Junqi Gao, Dong Li, Jianxing Liu, Ligang Wu, and
Bowen Zhou. 2024. Interactive continual learning: Fast and slow thinking. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition .
12882–12892.
[14] Biqing Qi, Junqi Gao, Xinquan Chen, Dong Li, Jianxing Liu, Ligang Wu, and
Bowen Zhou. 2025. Contrastive augmented graph2graph memory interaction
for few shot continual learning. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for
Video Technology (2025).
[15] Biqing Qi, Fangyuan Li, Zhen Wang, Junqi Gao, Dong Li, Peng Ye, and Bowen
Zhou. 2025. Less is more: Efficient model merging with binary task switch. In
Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference . 15265–
15274.
[16] Apoorv Saxena, Soumen Chakrabarti, and Partha Talukdar. 2021. Question An-
swering Over Temporal Knowledge Graphs. In Proceedings of the 59th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,
Chengqing Zong, Fei Xia, Wenjie Li, and Roberto Navigli (Eds.). Association for
Computational Linguistics, Online, 6663–6676. doi:10.18653/v1/2021.acl-long.520
[17] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne
Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal
Azhar, et al .2023. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.13971 (2023).
[18] Bin Wang, Chao Xu, Xiaomeng Zhao, Linke Ouyang, Fan Wu, Zhiyuan Zhao,
Rui Xu, Kaiwen Liu, Yuan Qu, Fukai Shang, et al .2024. Mineru: An open-source
solution for precise document content extraction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.18839
(2024).
[19] Zhilin Wang, Alexander Bukharin, Olivier Delalleau, Daniel Egert, Gerald Shen,
Jiaqi Zeng, Oleksii Kuchaiev, and Yi Dong. 2025. HelpSteer2-Preference: Comple-
menting Ratings with Preferences. In The Thirteenth International Conference on
Learning Representations . https://openreview.net/forum?id=MnfHxPP5gs[20] Siheng Xiong, Ali Payani, Ramana Kompella, and Faramarz Fekri. 2024. Large
language models can learn temporal reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06853
(2024).
[21] Ziwei Xu, Sanjay Jain, and Mohan Kankanhalli. 2024. Hallucination is inevitable:
An innate limitation of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.11817
(2024).
[22] An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu,
Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, et al .2024. Qwen2. 5
Technical Report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15115 (2024).
[23] Dun Zhang, Jiacheng Li, Ziyang Zeng, and Fulong Wang. 2024. Jasper and Stella:
distillation of SOTA embedding models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19048 (2024).
[24] Zhihan Zhang, Yixin Cao, Chenchen Ye, Yunshan Ma, Lizi Liao, and Tat-Seng
Chua. 2024. Analyzing Temporal Complex Events with Large Language Models?
A Benchmark towards Temporal, Long Context Understanding. In Proceedings of
the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers) , Lun-Wei Ku, Andre Martins, and Vivek Srikumar (Eds.). Association
for Computational Linguistics, Bangkok, Thailand, 1588–1606. doi:10.18653/v1/
2024.acl-long.87
[25] Anni Zou, Wenhao Yu, Hongming Zhang, Kaixin Ma, Deng Cai, Zhuosheng
Zhang, Hai Zhao, and Dong Yu. 2024. Docbench: A benchmark for evaluating
llm-based document reading systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.10701 (2024).

--- PAGE 11 ---
T-GRAG: A Dynamic GraphRAG Framework for Resolving Temporal Conflicts and Redundancy in Knowledge Retrieval MM ’25, October 27–31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland
A Experiments
A.1 Prompt for LLM Evaluation
Prompt for LLM Evaluation
Task Overview:
You are tasked with evaluating user answers based on a given question, reference answer, and additional reference text. Your goal is to assess the
correctness of the user answer using a specific metric.
Evaluation Criteria:
(1)Yes/No Questions: Verify if the user’s answer aligns with the reference answer in terms of a "yes" or "no" response.
(2)Short Answers/Directives: Ensure key details such as numbers, specific nouns/verbs, and dates match those in the reference answer.
(3)Abstractive/Long Answers: The user’s answer can differ in wording but must convey the same meaning and contain the same key
information as the reference answer to be considered correct.
Evaluation Process:
(1) Identify the type of question presented.
(2) Apply the relevant criteria from the Evaluation Criteria.
(3) Compare the user’s answer against the reference answer accordingly.
(4) Consult the reference text for clarification when needed.
(5) Score the answer with a binary label 0 or 1, where 0 denotes wrong and 1 denotes correct.
(6)Note: If the user answer is 0 or an empty string, it should get a 0 score.
Real Data:
Question: {question}
User Answer: {sys_ans}
Reference Answer: {ref_ans}
Reference Text: {ref_text}
Output:
Evaluation Form (score ONLY):
- Correctness: {score}

--- PAGE 12 ---
MM ’25, October 27–31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland Dong Li et al.
B Prompt for Generating Knowledge Graph
Entity Extraction Prompts
Task: Given a text document that is potentially relevant to this activity and a list of entity types, identify all entities of those types
from the text and all relationships among the identified entities.
Steps:
(1) Identify all entities. For each identified entity, extract the following information:
•entity_name: Name of the entity, capitalized
•entity_type: One of the following types: {entity_types}
•entity_description: Comprehensive description of the entity’s attributes and activities
Format each entity as "entity"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩<entity_name>⟨tuple_delimiter⟩<entity_type>⟨tuple_delimiter⟩
<entity_description> .
(2)From the entities identified in step 1, identify all pairs of (source_entity, target_entity) that are *clearly related* to each other.
For each pair of related entities, extract the following information:
•source_entity: name of the source entity, as identified in step 1
•target_entity: name of the target entity, as identified in step 1
•relationship_description: explanation as to why you think the source entity and the target entity are related
•relationship_strength: A numeric score showing the strength of the relationship between the source and target entities
Format each relationship as "relationship"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩<source_entity>⟨tuple_delimiter
⟩<target_entity>⟨tuple_delimiter⟩<relationship_description> ⟨tuple_delimiter⟩<relationship_strength> .
(3)Return output in English as a single list of all the entities and relationships identified in steps 1 and 2. Use {record_delimiter}
as the list delimiter.
(4) When finished, output {completion_delimiter} .
Examples:
Entity_types: [person, technology, mission, organization, location]
Text: Alex’s frustration was overshadowed by Taylor’s certainty. Their competitive tension kept him alert, as his and Jordan’s
commitment to discovery felt like a silent rebellion against Cruz’s controlling vision. Unexpectedly, Taylor paused beside Jordan,
observing the device with reverence. "If we can understand this tech, it could change the game for all of us," Taylor said quietly.
Their earlier dismissal had shifted to reluctant respect, and a brief, silent truce formed between Jordan and Taylor. This small but
noticeable change was acknowledged by Alex, who knew they had all arrived here through different paths.
Output:
•("entity"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Alex"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"person"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Alex is a character who experiences frustration
and is observant of the dynamics among other characters.")
•("entity"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Taylor"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"person"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Taylor is portrayed with authoritarian cer-
tainty and shows a moment of reverence towards a device, indicating a change in perspective.")
•("entity"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Jordan"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"person"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Jordan shares a commitment to discovery
and has a significant interaction with Taylor regarding a device.")
•("entity"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Cruz"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"person"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Cruz is associated with a vision of control and
order, influencing the dynamics among other characters.")
•("entity"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"The Device"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"technology"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"The Device is central to the story,
with potential game-changing implications, and is revered by Taylor.")
•("relationship"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Alex"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Taylor"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Alex is affected by Taylor’s authoritarian
certainty and observes changes in Taylor’s attitude towards the device." ⟨tuple_delimiter⟩7)
•("relationship"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Alex"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Jordan"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Alex and Jordan share a commitment to
discovery, which contrasts with Cruz’s vision." ⟨tuple_delimiter⟩6)
•("relationship"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Taylor"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Jordan"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Taylor and Jordan interact directly
regarding the device, leading to a moment of mutual respect and an uneasy truce." ⟨tuple_delimiter⟩8)
•("relationship"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Jordan"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Cruz"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Jordan’s commitment to discovery is in
rebellion against Cruz’s vision of control and order." ⟨tuple_delimiter⟩5)
•("relationship"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Taylor"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"The Device"⟨tuple_delimiter⟩"Taylor shows reverence towards
the device, indicating its importance and potential impact." ⟨tuple_delimiter⟩9)
Real Data:
Entity types: {entity_types}
Text: {input_text}
Output:

--- PAGE 13 ---
T-GRAG: A Dynamic GraphRAG Framework for Resolving Temporal Conflicts and Redundancy in Knowledge Retrieval MM ’25, October 27–31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland
B.1 Prompt for Temporal Query Decomposition
TQD Prompts
Task: Break down a question containing multiple years into individual questions for each year. Each question should include the
year and the specific question related to that year.
!!! output format must like [<year><SEP><question>]!!!
!!! output format must like [<year><SEP><question>]!!!
!!! output format must like [<year><SEP><question>]!!!
!!!Do not output "Here is the summary of the provided text" Or similarly, directly output the output!!!
!!!Do not output "Here is the summary of the provided text" Or similarly, directly output the output!!!
!!!Do not output many answer, just choose one, directly output the output!!!
the output only is [<year><SEP><question>], Do not have any other text.
Examples:
Example 1: question: "How many people worked for the Audi Group worldwide in 2017 and 2023, respectively?" output:
[2017<SEP>"How many people worked for the Audi Group worldwide in 2017"] [2023<SEP>"How many people worked for the
Audi Group worldwide in 2023"]
Example 2: question: "How much CO2 was saved through Audi’s Aluminum Closed Loop process in 2019 compared to the
Aluminum Closed Loop Pilot Project in 2017?" output: [2019<SEP>"How much CO2 was saved through Audi’s Aluminum Closed
Loop process in 2019"] [2017<SEP>"How much CO2 was saved through Audi’s Aluminum Closed Loop Pilot Project in 2017"]
Example 3: question: "What were the energy intensity of Audi’s car production in 2020, 2019 and 2017 respectively?" output:
[2020<SEP>"What was the energy intensity of Audi’s car production in 2020?"] [2019<SEP>"What was the energy intensity of
Audi’s car production in 2019?"] [2017<SEP>"What was the energy intensity of Audi’s car production in 2017?"]
Example 4: question: "How does Audi’s electric vehicle model launch plan in 2023-2025 compare to its electrification efforts in
2021-2022?" output: [2023-2025<SEP>"How does Audi’s electric vehicle model launch plan in 2023-2025?"] [2021-2022<SEP>"How
does Audi’s electrification efforts in 2021-2022?"]
Real Data:
question:{question}
output:

--- PAGE 14 ---
MM ’25, October 27–31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland Dong Li et al.
B.2 Prompt for LLM Enhancement Generation
Subquestion Enhancement Generation Prompts
Role:
You are a helpful assistant who can answer questions about the data in the provided table.
Goal:
Use the relevant data provided in the table to answer questions about the data in the table. If you don’t know the answer, just say
’I’m sorry I don’t know the answer’ directly.
Output format:
The output needs to be concise, which is the conclusion of your final answer to this question. Do not output the thought process.
Question: {question}
Data tables: {context_data}
Final Question Answer Prompts
Role:
You now need to answer this question based on the completed sub questions and corresponding answers I have provided to you. I
have broken down the question you need to answer into multiple different sub questions and generated corresponding answers. You
need to answer this question based on the completed sub questions and corresponding answers. If you don’t know the answer, just
say so. Do not make anything up.
Output format:
The output needs to be concise, which is the conclusion of your final answer to this question. Do not output the thought process
Input Data:
final question: {question}
sub questions and corresponding answers: {qa_dict}
C Prompts for Building Dataset
The prompts designed to build dataset can be categorized into three distinct types: prompt for generating summary, prompt for generating
key points, and prompt for creating QA pairs.
C.1 Prompt for Generating Summary
Prompt for Generating Summary from chunks
You are an AI assistant tasked with reading and understanding a lengthy text and generating a summary in pure text form. The
summary should adhere to the following specific requirements:
1. The summary should cover a broad range of information, aiming to include the vast majority of details from the original text.
2. Minimize the use of pronouns and clearly specify the names of entities to ensure clarity.
3. Retain any time-related data and other crucial details without omitting them, ensuring the summary is comprehensive and
accurate.
4. Avoid using quotation marks or other special symbols, and present the summary in plain text without complex formatting or
lists, structuring it into standard paragraphs.
Please ensure the output aligns with these requirements.

--- PAGE 15 ---
T-GRAG: A Dynamic GraphRAG Framework for Resolving Temporal Conflicts and Redundancy in Knowledge Retrieval MM ’25, October 27–31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland

--- PAGE 16 ---
MM ’25, October 27–31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland Dong Li et al.
C.2 Prompt for Generating Key Points
Prompt for Generating Key Points from Summary
Task:
You are an artificial intelligence assistant, please extract key points from the article according to the following rules:
1. The key points should be independent of each other and the content should avoid overlapping as much as possible.
2. Key points should be concise, accurate, and complete, especially when it comes to numbers, names, and dates.
3. The key points should not have complex formats or line breaks, just one or two sentences
4. If the key points do not involve events that occurred in year, please ignore them and keep only discussing events that occurred
in year.
5. Basically, pronouns such as "he, she, them, it" cannot be used, and it is necessary to clearly indicate the entity you are referencing
in the key points.
6. The following opening phrases are not allowed: -The article discussed -The article shows -The article emphasizes -The speaker
said -The author mentioned... and so on.
Output Format:
The response should be JSON formatted as follows:
{"point-id":"point"}
The beginning and end of the answer must be {}
!!!The answer is only in JSON format,Don’t output here is the output Or similarly, directly output the output!!!
Example:
Input: Here is the summary of the provided text in plain text, adhering to the specified requirements:The Audi Corporate
Responsibility Report 2012, published by AUDI AG, presents the company’s work in corporate responsibility (CR) to stakeholders
and the public for the first time. As a member of the UN Global Compact since February 2012, AUDI AG adheres to the ten principles
in Human Rights, Labor, Environment, and Anti-Corruption. The report covers the period from January 1 to December 31, 2012, and
includes supplementary information up to the editorial deadline in March 2013.
The Audi Group, comprising the Audi and Lamborghini brands, is a leading carmaker in the premium and supercar segment.
In 2012, the group expanded its portfolio by acquiring DUCATI MOTOR HOLDING S.P.A., entering the motorcycle market. The
company also manufactures engines in Győr, Hungary, for Audi, other Volkswagen Group companies, and third parties.The report is
structured around five core themes: Operations, Product, Environment, Employees, and Society. It conforms to the G3.1 Guidelines
of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) and the Automotive Sector Supplement, with an Application Level confirmed as B+. An
independent audit was conducted by PricewaterhouseCoopers.Audi’s Board of Management, including Prof. Rupert Stadler, Luca
de Meo, Dr. Frank Dreves, Wolfgang Dürheimer, Dr. Bernd Martens, Prof. h. c. Thomas Sigi, and Axel Strotbek, emphasizes the
importance of sustainability and corporate responsibility. The company aims to ensure a livable future for generations to come,
inspired by its philosophy of ¨Vorsprung durch Technik. ¨The report highlights Audi’s product range, including various models
produced in different locations: Neckarsulm and Ingolstadt, Germany (e.g., A4 Sedan, A6 Sedan, A8, R8 Coupé); Martorell, Spain (Q3
by SEAT, S.A.); Sant’Agata Bolognese, Italy (Lamborghini models like Gallardo Coupé and Aventador Coupé); and Bologna, Italy
(Ducati motorcycles such as Diavel, Hypermotard, and Superbike).Key figures and data for the period 2010-2012 are included in the
report, which can be viewed in its entirety online in German and English at www.audi.com/cr-report2012. The next fully revised
report will be published in the first half of 2015, with main key figures for 2013 revised in the first half of 2014. Readers can contact
Dr. Peter F. Tropschuh, Head of Corporate Responsibility at AUDI AG, with questions or comments.
Output:
"point-1": "AUDI AG published its first Corporate Responsibility Report in 2012, covering the period from January 1 to December
31, 2012, with supplementary information up to March 2013."
"point-2": "AUDI AG became a member of the UN Global Compact in February 2012, adhering to ten principles in Human Rights,
Labor, Environment, and Anti-Corruption."
"point-3": "The Audi Group, including Audi and Lamborghini brands, acquired DUCATI MOTOR HOLDING S.P.A. in 2012 and
entered the motorcycle market."
"point-4": "The report is structured around five core themes: Operations, Product, Environment, Employees, and Society, and
conforms to the G3.1 Guidelines of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) with an Application Level of B+."
"point-5": "The report includes an independent audit conducted by PricewaterhouseCoopers."
"point-6": "Audi’s Board of Management in 2012 emphasized sustainability and corporate responsibility, aiming to ensure a livable
future for future generations."
"point-7": "In 2012, Audi produced models in Germany (Neckarsulm, Ingolstadt), Spain (Martorell), Italy (Sant’Agata Bolognese,
Bologna), including various car and motorcycle models."
"point-8": "Key figures and data for 2010-2012 are available in the report, which can be accessed online at www.audi.com/cr-
report2012. The next fully revised report is scheduled for release in 2015."
Real Data:
Input: {summary}
Output:

--- PAGE 17 ---
T-GRAG: A Dynamic GraphRAG Framework for Resolving Temporal Conflicts and Redundancy in Knowledge Retrieval MM ’25, October 27–31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland
C.3 Prompt for Creating QA pairs
Prompt for Creating Single-Time QA pairs (remove time constraint as for Non-Time QA)
Please generate ten questions and their answers based on the input text.
Specific Requirements:
1. The questions should be diverse, covering different angles such as people, numbers, places, etc.
2. The information in the questions should be rich and clear enough to avoid ambiguity in the answers.
3. Design three challenging questions, avoiding simple string matching.
4. Each question’s answer should be concise, avoiding redundancy or repetition of the information in the question.
5. The events included in the questions must have clear time attributes as specified in the original text. If the event’s time cannot
be determined, abandon that question and find another event to create a question.(very important)
6. Each question must contain a time attribute. In other words, the question must include a specific time reference.(very important)
Output Format:
The output format should be in JSON format:
{ "Question": "Question",
"Answer": "Answer",
"OriginalText": "Original content of the text (keep the original content and format)"}
OriginalText: {text}
Prompt for Creating Dual-Time QA pairs (increase time points as for Multi-Time QA )
You are an artificial intelligence assistant, and I now need you to help me generate one time-series QA pairs. I will provide you
with the key points and corresponding original texts of two similar events from two annual reports.
Specific Requirements:
1. The question must be answered using the original texts corresponding to these two timestamps, and there should be temporal
comparability between these original texts.
2. The questions should be close-ended.
3. The question needs to be an inquiry about specific entities, numbers, or time, not about abstract concepts (such as Audi’s
strategy, Audi’s plans in the field of electric vehicles)
4. The information in the question should be sufficient and clear, avoiding ambiguous answers.
5. Multiple sub questions cannot be included in the problem, and the problem should be clear and specific.
6. The problem must contain two timestamps, year1 and year2.
7. The answer should be concise and clear, avoiding being lengthy or repetitive.
Output Format:
The output format should be in JSON format:
{ "Question": "Question",
"Answer": "Answer",
"Original text from {year1} report": "<original text from {year1} report>",
"Original text from {year2} report": "<original text from {year2} report>"}
Real Data:
Input Data:
keypoint in {year1} Annual Report:{keypoint1}, Corresponding original text: {text1};
keypoint in {year2} Annual Report:{keypoint2}, Corresponding original text: {text2}
Output:
Received 20 February 2007; revised 12 March 2009; accepted 5 June 2009
