# 2509.04483.pdf
# Converted from PDF to TXT
# Source path: ./document-conflict/2509.04483.pdf
# File size: 378860 bytes

===============================================
PDF FILE CONTENT
===============================================


--- PAGE 1 ---
DecMetrics: Structured Claim Decomposition Scoring for Factually
Consistent LLM Outputs
Minghui Huang
The University of Texas at Austin
minghuihuang@utexas.edu
Abstract
Claim decomposition plays a crucial role in the
fact-checking process by breaking down com-
plex claims into simpler atomic components
and identifying their unfactual elements. De-
spite its importance, current research primarily
focuses on generative methods for decompo-
sition, with insufficient emphasis on evaluat-
ing the quality of these decomposed atomic
claims. To bridge this gap, we introduce Dec-
Metrics , which comprises three new metrics:
COMPLETENESS ,CORRECTNESS , and SEMANTIC
ENTROPY , designed to automatically assess the
quality of claims produced by decomposition
models. Utilizing these metrics, we develop a
lightweight claim decomposition model, opti-
mizing its performance through the integration
of these metrics as a reward function. Through
automatic evaluation, our approach aims to set
a benchmark for claim decomposition, enhanc-
ing both the reliability and effectiveness of fact-
checking systems.1
1 Introduction
The utilization of long-form text generated by large
language models (LLMs) has become increasingly
prevalent. However, these texts often contain fac-
tual inaccuracies, necessitating the development of
methodologies to evaluate their factuality. Exist-
ing fact-checking approaches, such as SAFE (Wei
et al., 2024), FActScore (Min et al., 2023), and Fac-
Tool (Chern et al., 2023), conceptualize generated
text as claims and employ claim decomposition
as a foundational component of the fact-checking
process.
Claim decomposition entails breaking down a
claim, whether it be an entire text or a segment,
into individual atomic claims (Wanner et al., 2024;
Hu et al., 2024). Terms such as "atomic fact"
1Code and dataset available at: https://github.com/
huang22/DecMetricsLanny Flaherty
was born on
December 18,
1949, in Pen-
sacola, Florida.COMPLETENESS
/reveMissing
Information: 1949Lanny Flaherty
was born on
December 18.
Lanny Flaherty
was born in Pen-
sacola, Florida./Lanny Flaherty
was born on De-
cember 18, 1949.
Lanny Flaherty
was born in Pen-
sacola, Florida.Not Complete Complete
Lanny Flaherty
was born on
December 18,
1949, in Pen-
sacola, Florida.CORRECTNESS
/reveMisinformation:
July 27, 1942Lanny Flaherty
was born on
July 27, 1942.
Lanny Flaherty
was born in Pen-
sacola, Florida./Lanny Flaherty
was born on De-
cember 18, 1949.
Lanny Flaherty
was born in Pen-
sacola, Florida.Not CorrectCorrect
Lanny Flaherty was
born on Decem-
ber 18, 1949, in
Pensacola, Florida.SEMANTIC ENTROPY
Lanny Flaherty was
born on December 18.Lanny Flaherty was born
on December 18, 1949.
Lanny Flaherty
was born on 1949.
Lanny Flaherty was born
in Pensacola, Florida.Low Semantic Entropy
/reve
overlap
Figure 1: Characteristics of Claim Decomposition: High
Completeness, High Correctness, and High Semantic
Entropy. The process involves breaking down long-form
text into atomic claims. High-quality decompositions
are indicated by green, red, and purple boxes, whereas
orange boxes denote claims that may be deficient in
essential information, introduce misinformation, or ex-
hibit redundant semantic overlap.
and "atomic proposition" are frequently used in-
terchangeably with atomic claims. The tradi-
tional fact-checking procedure involves decom-
posing generated text into atomic claims, verify-
ing each claim’s factual accuracy against external
knowledge sources, and then compiling these re-
sults to determine the text’s overall factuality (Iqbal
et al., 2024; Li et al., 2024). Despite this, exist-
ing methodologies often overlook the variability in
claim decomposition quality.
To illustrate, if two models decompose the samearXiv:2509.04483v1  [cs.CL]  31 Aug 2025

--- PAGE 2 ---
claim into different numbers of atomic claims, the
resulting fact scores will differ. Additionally, if
decomposition models alter the claim during the
decomposition process, the atomic claims may be
factual but fail to accurately represent the origi-
nal claim. As depicted in the second sub-figure in
Figure 1, the claim within the orange box is not fac-
tual. However, if decomposition models transform
it to state ’Lanny Flaherty was born on Decem-
ber 18, 1949’, the fact score would misleadingly
reflect a high accuracy, misrepresenting the true
factuality of the LLM’s response. Given the critical
role of claim decomposition in the fact-checking
process, which affects the number and scope of
evaluated claims, the results and metrics are inher-
ently influenced by the decomposition method (Hu
et al., 2024). Therefore, it is essential to conduct a
comprehensive evaluation of decomposed claims
to ensure accuracy and reliability.
DecMetrics: Measures for Claim Decomposi-
tion Quality
To enhance the fact-checking process’s accuracy,
it is imperative to accurately decompose claims
into atomic claims. Thus, defining a high-quality
atomic claim becomes critical. We propose that
an ideal atomic claim should exhibit the follow-
ing characteristics, as demonstrated in Figure 1:
high completeness (Kamoi et al., 2023), high cor-
rectness (Wanner et al., 2024), and high semantic
entropy (Farquhar et al., 2024).
•High Completeness : The decomposed claims
should encompass all necessary facets of the
original text.
•High Correctness : Each atomic claim must
be factually correct, substantiated by the orig-
inal text.
•High Semantic Entropy : Atomic claims
should not exhibit repetitive paraphrasing or
semantic overlap; instead, they should be inde-
pendent and distinct, ensuring high semantic
entropy.
Leveraging these characteristics, we introduce
three metrics: COMPLETENESS ,CORRECTNESS , and
SEMANTIC ENTROPY , to automate the evaluation of
atomic claims.
DecModel: A Standardized Claim Decompo-
sition Model
Building on our established metrics, we propose
the development of a claim decomposition modelaimed at generating atomic claims that align with
these quality standards. We specifically employ
a reinforcement learning framework, as outlined
in prior studies (Schulman et al., 2017; Rafailov
et al., 2024), using these metrics as reward signals
to enhance the generation of high-quality atomic
claims.
Claim2Atom: A Comprehensive Claim De-
composition Benchmark
In parallel, we propose the creation of
Claim2Atom , a comprehensive evaluation bench-
mark for structuring claims into atomic compo-
nents. This benchmark aggregates and filters exist-
ing public datasets, FActScore (Min et al., 2023)
and WICE (Kamoi et al., 2023), along with our
newly curated decomposition dataset, DecData.
The benchmark is explicitly designed to facilitate
rigorous evaluations across several dimensions. It
enables a critical assessment of the capabilities of
various LLMs, provides a robust framework for
evaluating the effectiveness of our specialized de-
composition models, and serves as a foundational
tool for future research in the field of claim decom-
position.
2 Related Works
Many existing works employ a pipeline approach
to decompose text into atomic claims for evalu-
ating the factuality of long-form text. Recent ad-
vancements in claim decomposition mainly rely
on prompted large language model (LLM)-based
methods, often incorporating in-context example
decompositions (Min et al., 2023; Kamoi et al.,
2023; Chern et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2024; Iqbal
et al., 2024). To leverage propositions, akin to
atomic claims, as retrieval units, (Chen et al., 2024)
developed a Propositionizer that decomposes text
into simple propositions using data generated by
GPT-4. (Song et al., 2024) introduced VeriScore
to check whether each decomposed atomic claims
are verifiable. (Gunjal and Durrett, 2024) decontext
molecular facts to make each decomposed atomic
claims can be self-contained. However, there has
been limited attention to fully evaluate the quality
of these decomposed atomic claims. (Wanner et al.,
2024) highlighted that downstream fact-checking
methods are sensitive to the decomposition ap-
proach and proposed ClaimScore to assess the num-
ber of supported atomic claims as a measure of
decomposition quality. Nonetheless, this approach
overlooks the semantic overlap between atomic

--- PAGE 3 ---
claims and does not assess the completeness of the
decomposed claims. If a language model repeat-
edly paraphrases factual claims, it may achieve a
very high ClaimScore. Consequently, we plan to
define metrics for automatically evaluating the qual-
ity of decomposed atomic claims and use these met-
rics as rewards to train a reinforcement-learning-
based claim decomposition model. Our aim is to
generate atomic claims that are complete (Kamoi
et al., 2023), correct (Wanner et al., 2024), and ex-
hibit high semantic entropy (Farquhar et al., 2024).
3 DecMetrics: Evaluation Metrics for
Claim Decomposition Quality
We treat a text as a claim, and then decompose it
into atomic claims using a claim decomposition
model. Let d(c) ={ac1, . . . , ac n}denote the au-
tomatic decomposition of a claim cinto atomic
claims via the decomposition model d(·).
3.1 DecMetrics Overview
DecMetrics comprises three evaluation met-
rics: COMPLETENESS ,CORRECTNESS , and SEMANTIC
ENTROPY , each framed as an entailment classifica-
tion task. Following prior work (Kamoi et al., 2023;
Tang et al., 2024), we annotate entailment labels as
supported orunsupported .
3.1.1 COMPLETENESS Metric
This metric evaluates whether the decomposed
atomic claims {ac1, . . . , ac n}collectively cover all
necessary aspects of the original claim c. Unlike
traditional NLI tasks (Laban et al., 2022), which
classify claims as supported orunsupported in
a binary manner, COMPLETENESS measures fine-
grained factuality by computing the entailment
probability between the merged atomic claims and
the original claim. Formally:
cp(c, ac) =P(y=supported |c, ac),
where P(y=supported |c, ac)is derived using
a natural language inference (NLI) model. The
granularity of this metric is at the claim-claim level .
3.1.2 CORRECTNESS Metric
This metric evaluates whether each decomposed
atomic claim aciis factually faithful to the original
claim c, ensuring no fabrication or hallucination.
Formally, CORRECTNESS computes the fraction of
atomic claims entailed by c:cr(c, ac) =1
nnX
i=1I 
NLI(c, ac i) =supported
,
where I(·)is the indicator function (1 if aciis
entailed by c, 0 otherwise) and NLI(c, ac i)denotes
the entailment score from a natural language infer-
ence model. A high CORRECTNESS score indicates
minimal factual deviation during decomposition.
3.1.3 SEMANTIC ENTROPY Metric
To assess redundancy among atomic claims,
we cluster them using an NLI model: if
NLI(aci, acj) =supported or vice versa, aciand
acjbelong to the same cluster C. The SEMANTIC
ENTROPY metric, operating at the atomic claim-
atomic claim level , quantifies the diversity of
atomic claims via:
se({ac1, . . . , ac n}) =−X
CP(C) logP(C),
where P(C)is the probability of a decomposed
atomic claim acibelonging to cluster C. This en-
courages non-redundant (low clustering) and highly
atomic (numerous) decompositions.
These metrics function similarly to recall, pre-
cision, and accuracy in their capacity to reveal the
strengths and weaknesses of a model. High scores
across all three metrics are required for a compre-
hensive assessment of the model’s overall perfor-
mance.
For instance, if a claim is notably long,
SEMANTIC ENTROPY may increase, but may ex-
ist potential incomplete decomposition. In such
cases, COMPLETENESS can reveal decomposition
completion. Conversely, a decomposition model
returning the original claim will score high on
COMPLETENESS and CORRECTNESS , but zero on
SEMANTIC ENTROPY , exposing shortcomings. Simi-
larly, arbitrary atomic claims unrelated to the origi-
nal claim might result in high SEMANTIC ENTROPY ,
while COMPLETENESS andCORRECTNESS will high-
light discrepancies.
While these metrics leverage existing NLI mod-
els (Bowman et al., 2015; Williams et al., 2018;
Nie et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022), fine-tuning on
task-specific data is essential for optimal perfor-
mance.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Step 1: Entity Sampling
Select nentities
from Wikipedia⋆
Synthetic Data Generation
Step 2: Summary Extraction
Obtain the plain text summary
from the Wikipedia page⋆
Step 3: Claim Decomposition
Decompose claims into
non-splittable atomic claims⋆
Step 4: Decomposition Tree
Generate pairs of claims
and atomic claims⋆
Figure 2: Synthetic Data Generation Pro-
cess. The sequential process includes topic
sampling from Wikipedia, extracting textual
summaries as original claims, decomposing
claims into atomic claims while adjusting gran-
ularity, and constructing a decomposition tree
that pairs claims with atomic claims.c
ac1
ac1.1 ac1.2ac2 ac3The Mitrokhin Commission was an
Italian parliamentary commission
set up in 2002 to investigate alleged
KGB ties of some Italian politicians.
The commission
was set up in 2002.The Mitrokhin
Commission
was an Italian
parliamentary
commission.
The purpose of the
commission was to
investigate alleged
KGB ties of some
Italian politicians.
The Mitrokhin
Commission was
a parliamentary
commission.The Mitrokhin
Commission
was an Italian
commission.
Figure 3: Synthetic Data Visualation . Decomposition tree with
claims and atomic claims.
3.2 Synthetic Data Generation
To facilitate the calculation of evaluation metrics,
it is imperative to develop models that rely on syn-
thetic training data for effective training. The pro-
cess of generating synthetic data, depicted in Fig-
ure 2, involves several key steps:
Step 1: Entity Sampling from Wikipedia The
first step involves selecting entities from Wikipedia,
which forms the basis for further processes. Specifi-
cally, we sample 200 entities from Wikipedia, span-
ning from personal entities like ‘Floyd D. Rose’
to event-related entities such as the ‘2018 NBA
Awards’.
Step 2: Extracting Wikipedia Page Summaries
During this phase, we obtain the plain text sum-
mary from the Wikipedia page corresponding to
each entity using the Python library wikipedia2.
We exclude entities that do not produce satisfactory
summary text. After this filtration, 183 entities are
retained for subsequent processing.
Step 3: Claim Decomposition The Wikipedia
summaries are used as potential claims, which are
then decomposed using the large language model
(LLM) guided by the claim decomposition prompt
described in Appendix Figure 6. A critical aspect
2https://pypi.org/project/wikipedia/is ensuring claims are non-splittable; claims are it-
eratively split if the number of decomposed atomic
claims exceeds one, as detailed in Appendix Algo-
rithm 1. Entities with Wikipedia summaries that
cannot be decomposed into non-splittable claims af-
ter 10 iterations are filtered out. After this filtration
process, 180 entities are retained for subsequent
processing.
Step 4: Decomposition Tree Generation This
step involves the creation of a decomposition tree,
as illustrated in Figure 3. The tree displays claims
and their corresponding atomic claims at varying
levels of granularity. From this decomposition tree,
we extract all subtrees, which serve as the founda-
tion for generating synthetic training data. After
extracting the subtrees, we conduct a verification
process to ensure each subtree meets specific crite-
ria. This process involves a reverse check using a
LLM, guided by the atomic claim checking prompt
detailed in Appendix Figure 7. This process veri-
fies that the decomposed atomic claims adhere to
our criteria. Given that the forward decomposition
guarantees that atomic claims are non-splittable,
the reverse check focuses on verifying the follow-
ing: (1) the aggregate of the decomposed atomic
claims accurately represents the original claim’s
meaning, (2) each atomic claim is correct and fully

--- PAGE 5 ---
c
ac1
ac1.1 ac1.2ac2 ac3
(a)COMPLETENESSc
ac1
ac1.1 ac1.2ac2 ac3
(b)CORRECTNESS
c
ac1
ac1.1 ac1.2ac2 ac3
(c)SEMANTIC ENTROPY
Figure 4: Illustrations for different concepts: (a) Exam-
ple for COMPLETENESS : Demonstrates leaf node combi-
nations (nodes in green) and the node claim (node in
red). (b) Example for CORRECTNESS : Shows the node
claim (node in red) and each decomposed atomic claim
(nodes in green). (c) Example for SEMANTIC ENTROPY :
Illustrates the node claim (node in red) and decomposed
atomic claims (nodes in green) ensuring independence
among claims.
expressive of the original claim’s content, and (3)
there is no semantic overlap between atomic claims.
Any subtrees failing to meet these conditions are
filtered out during the reverse check.
3.2.1 Data Synthesis for DecMetrics
In Step 4, we get decomposition trees that meet
the conditions, which are labeled as supported ex-
amples. To generate unsupported examples, we
employ a method that utilizes claims as root nodes
and their decomposed atomic claims as leaf nodes
within the decomposition trees and their subtrees.
This structured approach allows us to systemati-
cally dissect complex claims into fundamental com-
ponents, ensuring precise and detailed training and
evaluating datasets. The process is visually illus-
trated in Figure 4.
COMPLETENESS Figure 4(a) illustrates the exam-
ple of COMPLETENESS . Positive samples are gener-
ated by shuffling and pairing leaf node combina-
tions with the node claim, and these are labeled
assupported . For instance, one such combination
in the figure is ( ac1.1,ac1.2,ac2,ac3) with the
node claim c. In contrast, negative samples areformed by arbitrarily discarding some leaf nodes
and pairing the remaining combinations with the
node claim, labeled as unsupported .
CORRECTNESS Figure 4(b) illustrates the example
ofCORRECTNESS . A random node is selected from
the decomposition tree as the claim at level k. Its
child nodes, extending from level k+ 1to the leaf
nodes, act as decomposed atomic claims. Pairs
are formed between the node claim and each de-
composed atomic claim, resulting in CORRECTNESS -
positive samples labeled as supported . An example
shown involves node claim cand a correctly decom-
posed atomic claim ac1.1. Nodes from subtrees not
under node are used to create negative samples
labeled as unsupported .
SEMANTIC ENTROPY SEMANTIC ENTROPY is de-
picted to ensure the independence of decomposed
atomic claims. The model aims to identify over-
laps among these claims. Atomic claims with
overlaps are labeled as supported ; for example,
in Figure 4(c), ac1overlaps with ac1.1. Con-
versely, atomic claims without overlaps are la-
beled as unsupported , such as ac1not overlapping
withac2. Achieving claim independence is facili-
tated through the identification of non-overlapping
nodes.
We get 621, 2063 and 2063 supported examples
forCOMPLETENESS ,CORRECTNESS , and SEMANTIC
ENTROPY specifically. In summary, the syn-
thetic data generation process leverages structured
methodologies for creating high-quality datasets
through iterative refinement. The use of diverse
assessment criteria ensures data integrity and ac-
curacy, which are crucial for dependable model
training.
3.2.2 Training and Evaluation Synthesized
Data for DecMetrics
We partition the decomposition trees into training
and evaluation sets, allocating 80% for training
and reserving the remaining 20% for evaluation.
For training, examples that satisfy the conditions
outlined in Step 4 are labeled as supported . An
dynamic number of unsupported examples are sam-
pled to meet the requirement of the training process.
In the evaluation data, examples meeting the condi-
tions specified in Step 4 are labeled as supported ,
while an equivalent number of unsupported exam-
ples are generated using the same synthetic process
described in Section 3.2.1.

--- PAGE 6 ---
3.3 Experiment Settings of DecMetrics
To decompose claims into atomic claims in
Step 3, we conducted experiments using mul-
tiple large language models (LLMs), includ-
ing LLaMA-3.1-405B-Intruct (AI@Meta, 2024),
Mixtral-8x22B (Jiang et al., 2024), GPT-4 (OpenAI
et al., 2024), DeepSeek V3 (DeepSeek-AI et al.,
2025), and Qwen 3-32B (Yang et al., 2025). We
found that Qwen 3-32B was particularly efficient
and effective at generating atomic claims that could
be processed using regex functions. Therefore, we
used Qwen 3-32B in Step 3 to generate synthetic
training data.
After Step 3, we obtained a total of 4,889 decom-
posed claims, derived from text summaries of 180
entities as original claims. In Step 4, these atomic
claims were categorized into 3,637 leaf nodes and
1,252 general child nodes. After reverse checking
process in Step 4, we kept 778 decomposition trees,
the detail of data are shown in Appendix Table 6.
Using these claims and decomposed claims,
we created training examples for three met-
rics: COMPLETENESS ,CORRECTNESS , and SEMANTIC
ENTROPY . With these synthetic training data, we
fine-tune DeBERTa-v3-large (He et al., 2021) for
DecMetrics with Localized Contrastive Estimation
loss (Gao et al., 2021).
3.4 Performance Evaluation of DecMetrics
We assess the effectiveness of automated evaluation
models on both the DecMetrics test dataset and es-
tablished NLI datasets, specifically SNLI (Bowman
et al., 2015) and MultiNLI (Williams et al., 2018).
Table1 provides a comparative analysis of model
performance using standard classification metrics.
Our findings demonstrate that existing NLI mod-
els, such as bart-large-mnli (Lewis et al., 2020),
trained on MultiNLI, and cross-encoder mod-
els (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019) ( nli-deberta-
v3-large ,nli-roberta-base , and nli-MiniLM2-L6-
H768 ) trained on SNLI and MultiNLI, perform
well on traditional NLI datasets. However, these
models encounter difficulties with the DecMetrics
test data, as exhibited by the disparity between high
recall and low precision scores in some models, and
high precision but low recall in others. This indi-
cates a need for models that perform consistently
well across all classification metrics. Therefore, it
is essential to develop models specifically adapted
and trained on our synthetic dataset for DecMetrics
evaluation.Dataset Model Accuracy Precision Recall F1-Score
DecMetricsbart-large-mnli 89.50% 82.93% 99.48% 90.45%
nli-deberta-v3-large 89.97% 84.91% 97.23% 90.65%
nli-roberta-base 93.86% 97.21% 90.32% 93.64%
nli-MiniLM2-L6-H768 94.34% 97.68% 90.84% 94.13%
DecMetrics 99.14% 99.65% 98.62% 99.13%
SNLIbart-large-mnli 79.71% 63.30% 97.15% 76.65%
nli-deberta-v3-large 94.94% 92.89% 92.31% 92.60%
nli-roberta-base 94.62% 92.69% 91.51% 92.10%
nli-MiniLM2-L6-H768 94.57% 92.02% 92.16% 92.09%
DecMetrics 83.34% 73.30% 80.85% 76.89%
MultiNLIbart-large-mnli 81.40% 65.99% 97.37% 78.67%
nli-deberta-v3-large 93.98% 93.51% 89.08% 91.25%
nli-roberta-base 92.39% 90.15% 88.02% 89.07%
nli-MiniLM2-L6-H768 92.17% 89.87% 87.64% 88.74%
DecMetrics 71.95% 58.81% 67.92% 63.04%
Table 1: Evaluation Metrics for Models across Different
Datasets.
4 DecModel: A Standardized Claim
Decomposition Model
In this section, we investigate the application of
evaluation metrics during model training to cre-
ate a standardized decomposition model, Dec-
Model . This model is designed to effectively de-
compose claims into atomic components that meet
to the criteria of COMPLETENESS ,CORRECTNESS ,
andSEMANTIC ENTROPY .
4.1 Training Pipeline of DecModel
Optimizing a supervised claim decomposition
model for the three metrics presents substantial
challenges. However, these metrics are advanta-
geous when used as reward signals within a re-
inforcement learning framework. We adopt the
reinforcement learning paradigm, implementing a
three-stage training pipeline:
1.Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) : Initially, we
employ supervised learning with high-quality
claim decomposition annotations to establish
baseline decomposition capabilities for our
model.
2.Reward Modeling : We define a composite
reward function:
R(c, ac) =α·cp(c, ac)+β·cr(c, ac)+γ·se(ac)
where α,β, and γare tunable hyperparam-
eters determining the relative importance of
each metric dimension.
3.Reinforcement Learning Optimization :
The model is further refined through Proximal
Policy Optimization (PPO) (Schulman et al.,
2017) using the learned reward function, en-
hancing its decomposition capabilities while
preserving generation diversity.

--- PAGE 7 ---
4.2 Configuration of DecModel
In our experiments, we utilized three T5-based
model architectures (Raffel et al., 2020): T5-small
with 80 million parameters, T5-base with 250 mil-
lion parameters, and T5-large with 780 million
parameters, as the foundational architectures for
our claim decomposition tasks. To isolate the con-
tribution of each reward component, we set α,β,
andγto 1 by default and performed ablations by
zeroing out individual coefficients.
5 Claim2Atom: Claim Decomposition
Benchmark
Follow the creation of LLM-AGGREFACT (Tang
et al., 2024), we constructed Claim2Atom , which
is a comprehensive evaluation benchmark structur-
ing claims into atomic claims. This benchmark
integrates both existing public datasets, FActScore
and WICE, and newly curated decomposition ex-
amples from DecData.
5.1 FActScore and WICE: Public Datasets for
Claim Decomposition Evaluation
The FActScore and WICE datasets do not guaran-
tee the quality of atomic claims. To address this,
we filtered out examples with atomic claims that
were incomplete, incorrect, or exhibited semantic
overlap.
5.2 DecData: A New Dataset for Claim
Decomposition Evaluation
From the structured decomposition trees and their
associated subtrees, we construct the dataset Dec-
Data , consisting of pairs in the form of (claim,
atomic claims). The DecData dataset is partitioned
into training and test sets to facilitate the training
and evaluation of claim decomposition models.
5.3 Benchmark Details
This multifaceted approach aims to improve both
the robustness and the breadth of the benchmark.
Table 2 presents the statistics of the resulting claim
decomposition benchmark.
The newly constructed benchmark is specifically
designed to facilitate a rigorous evaluation across
several dimensions. Firstly, it enables a critical
assessment of various LLM capabilities. Addition-
ally, it provides a robust framework to evaluate
the effectiveness of our specialized decomposition
models. Finally, this benchmark is intended toSplit Dataset Claims Atomic Claims Max Avg
FActScoretrain 7558 12038 22 1.59
test 1880 2992 22 1.59
WICEtrain 3194 4668 6 1.46
test 1854 2702 6 1.46
DecDatatrain 2684 4126 42 1.54
test 656 1002 19 1.53
ALLtrain 13436 20832 42 1.55
test 4390 6696 22 1.53
Table 2: Statistics of the Claim Decomposition Bench-
mark.
Model Size COMP. CORR. SEM.
Qwen3-32B 32B 95.67% 94.77% 0.3240
Mistral-NeMo-12B-Instruct 12B 80.08% 80.14% 0.4420
Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct 3B 24.37% 10.81% 2.6175
DecModel large 0.78B 93.70% 98.96% 0.2823
DecModel base 0.25B 92.67% 99.70% 0.2620
DecModel small 0.08B 91.37% 98.90% 0.2343
Table 3: Evaluation for Claim Decomposition in test
data of Claim2Atom.
serve as a foundational tool for future research en-
deavors in the realm of claim decomposition.
6 Experimental Setup
In our experiments, we compare decomposition
quality against contemporary large language mod-
els (LLMs). This comparison aims to highlight the
effectiveness of our approach relative to existing
models.
For downstream evaluation, we integrate mul-
tiple state-of-the-art fact-checking systems to as-
sess the practical utility of the decomposed atomic
claims generated by DecModel large.
Additionally, we conduct an ablation study with
DecModel large to analyze the individual contribu-
tion of each metric in DecMetrics. By isolating
each component in the reward structure, we eval-
uate their impact on overall performance, offering
insights into the effectiveness of the metrics in en-
hancing claim decomposition outcomes.
6.1 Metric Performance Comparison
Table 3 provides a detailed evaluation of our T5-
based models, available in various configurations,
in comparison to baseline LLMs such as Qwen3-
32B, Mistral-NeMo-12B-Instruct and Llama-3.2-
3B-Instruct. This table also includes parameter
counts of models for efficiency analysis. It can
be observed that both Qwen3-32B, Mistral-NeMo-
12B-Instruct and Llama-3.2-3B-Instruct achieve
high SEMANTIC ENTROPY scores but exhibit low
CORRECTNESS metrics. This suggests that while

--- PAGE 8 ---
Decomposition Model BAcc
Not DecomposeSummaC-Conv 62.1%
SummaC-ZS 67.9%
QAFactEval 66.5%
AlignScore 70.4%
MiniCheck-RBTA 72.6%
MiniCheck-DBTA 72.7%
MiniCheck-FT5 74.7%
GPT-4SummaC-Conv 58.8%
SummaC-ZS 69.1%
QAFactEval 64.6%
AlignScore 71.5%
MiniCheck-RBTA 73.2%
MiniCheck-DBTA 72.7%
MiniCheck-FT5 73.3%
DecModel largeSummaC-Conv 55.5%
SummaC-ZS 67.3%
QAFactEval 60.9%
AlignScore 69.7%
MiniCheck-RBTA 72.5%
MiniCheck-DBTA 71.5%
MiniCheck-FT5 72.4%
Table 4: Evaluation for Claim Decomposition on the
test set of LLM-AGGREFACT.
these LLMs are proficient in generating numerous
atomic claims, they often fall short in maintaining
factual accuracy with respect to the original claims.
Our models, in contrast, exhibit competitive perfor-
mance levels comparable to those of the LLMs and
demonstrate superior parameter efficiency.
6.2 Downstream Fact-Checking Performance
In this analysis, we evaluate the effectiveness
of atomic claim decomposition within down-
stream fact-checking systems. Claims are broken
down into atomic facts, with results from non-
decomposed and GPT-4 models (Tang et al., 2024)
serving as baselines for comparison. Fact-checking
systems assess the factuality of each atomic claim;
a claim is supported if all its atomic facts are cor-
roborated by the source document, otherwise it is
considered unsupported. Note that FactCheck-GPT
datasets inherently comprise atomic facts.
Table 4 shows results across a range of fact-
checking systems. A slight decrease in perfor-
mance is observed, attributed to our aggregation
approach. This method, demanding support for all
atomic claims, can enhance precision but may neg-
atively impact recall, as it includes non-essential
claims that are challenging to verify, thereby po-DecModel large COMP. CORR. SEM.
w/o DecMetrics 93.70% 98.94% 0.2534
w/o COMPLETENESS 93.12% 99.21% 0.3036
w/o CORRECTNESS 94.08% 98.76% 0.2894
w/o SEMANTIC ENTROPY 93.64% 98.77% 0.2409
Table 5: Ablation study results on the test data of
Claim2Atom.
tentially diminishing recall. To better integrate
atomic claims with fact-checking systems, more
sophisticated aggregation strategies, such as those
employed by SummaC models (Laban et al., 2022),
could be explored to optimize performance.
6.3 Ablation Study
Table 5 presents a systematic evaluation of indi-
vidual reward components by isolating each met-
ric:COMPLETENESS ,CORRECTNESS , and SEMANTIC
ENTROPY .
The results in Table 5 indicate that removing
the DecMetrics as a reward in the SFT without
the RL stage results in decreased COMPLETENESS
andSEMANTIC ENTROPY . This suggests that omit-
ting DecMetrics tends to produce primarily cor-
rect outputs while avoiding uncertain ones, thereby
generating fewer atomic claims. Alternatively,
employing pairwise combinations of DecMetrics
reward components enables the Claim Decom-
poser to generate more atomic claims, resulting
in increased COMPLETENESS ,CORRECTNESS , and
SEMANTIC ENTROPY scores. Specifically, excluding
COMPLETENESS reduces the COMPLETENESS score;
omitting CORRECTNESS lowers the CORRECTNESS
score; and excluding SEMANTIC ENTROPY dimin-
ishes the SEMANTIC ENTROPY score. These obser-
vations underscore the synergistic contribution of
all three metrics to the overall performance.
7 Conclusion
In this work, we introduce DecMetrics , a new
set of metrics: COMPLETENESS ,CORRECTNESS , and
SEMANTIC ENTROPY , designed to improve the eval-
uation of claim decomposition in fact-checking.
We also present DecModel , a lightweight model
that uses reinforcement learning with DecMet-
rics to set new standards for generating accurate
atomic claims. To further aid research, we propose
Claim2Atom , a comprehensive benchmark that in-
tegrates existing datasets with our new DecData,
enabling diverse evaluations in claim decomposi-
tion.

--- PAGE 9 ---
8 Limitations
Despite the structured approach to synthetic data
generation via Wikipedia summaries and decompo-
sition steps, certain limitations persist:
Generalization Limitations Synthetic data
might not fully capture real-world complexity
and nuances, limiting model generalizability.
Moreover, entity selection may introduce bias,
as the chosen 200 subjects do not represent all
topics. Specific claim decomposition prompts
might perpetuate biases in large language models
(LLMs).
Scalability Issues The decomposition and verifi-
cation process is resource-intensive, limiting scala-
bility and experimentation across larger datasets or
different domains. This computational demand can
hinder refinement and adaptation efforts.
In summary, these limitations point to essential
areas for further improvement to enhance the ro-
bustness, generalizability, and efficiency of the syn-
thetic data generation process.
References
AI@Meta. 2024. Llama 3 model card.
Samuel R. Bowman, Gabor Angeli, Christopher Potts,
and Christopher D. Manning. 2015. A large anno-
tated corpus for learning natural language inference.
InProceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages
632–642, Lisbon, Portugal. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Tong Chen, Hongwei Wang, Sihao Chen, Wenhao Yu,
Kaixin Ma, Xinran Zhao, Hongming Zhang, and
Dong Yu. 2024. Dense X Retrieval: What Retrieval
Granularity Should We Use? In Proceedings of the
2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing , pages 15159–15177, Miami,
Florida, USA. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
I.-Chun Chern, Steffi Chern, Shiqi Chen, Weizhe Yuan,
Kehua Feng, Chunting Zhou, Junxian He, Graham
Neubig, and Pengfei Liu. 2023. FacTool: Factual-
ity Detection in Generative AI – A Tool Augmented
Framework for Multi-Task and Multi-Domain Sce-
narios. arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2307.13528 [cs].
DeepSeek-AI, Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingx-
uan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang
Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan,
Damai Dai, Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Deli Chen,
Dongjie Ji, Erhang Li, Fangyun Lin, Fucong Dai,
Fuli Luo, Guangbo Hao, Guanting Chen, Guowei
Li, H. Zhang, Han Bao, Hanwei Xu, HaochengWang, Haowei Zhang, Honghui Ding, Huajian Xin,
Huazuo Gao, Hui Li, Hui Qu, J. L. Cai, Jian Liang,
Jianzhong Guo, Jiaqi Ni, Jiashi Li, Jiawei Wang,
Jin Chen, Jingchang Chen, Jingyang Yuan, Junjie
Qiu, Junlong Li, Junxiao Song, Kai Dong, Kai Hu,
Kaige Gao, Kang Guan, Kexin Huang, Kuai Yu, Lean
Wang, Lecong Zhang, Lei Xu, Leyi Xia, Liang Zhao,
Litong Wang, Liyue Zhang, Meng Li, Miaojun Wang,
Mingchuan Zhang, Minghua Zhang, Minghui Tang,
Mingming Li, Ning Tian, Panpan Huang, Peiyi Wang,
Peng Zhang, Qiancheng Wang, Qihao Zhu, Qinyu
Chen, Qiushi Du, R. J. Chen, R. L. Jin, Ruiqi Ge,
Ruisong Zhang, Ruizhe Pan, Runji Wang, Runxin
Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Ruyi Chen, S. S. Li, Shanghao
Lu, Shangyan Zhou, Shanhuang Chen, Shaoqing Wu,
Shengfeng Ye, Shengfeng Ye, Shirong Ma, Shiyu
Wang, Shuang Zhou, Shuiping Yu, Shunfeng Zhou,
Shuting Pan, T. Wang, Tao Yun, Tian Pei, Tianyu Sun,
W. L. Xiao, Wangding Zeng, Wanjia Zhao, Wei An,
Wen Liu, Wenfeng Liang, Wenjun Gao, Wenqin Yu,
Wentao Zhang, X. Q. Li, Xiangyue Jin, Xianzu Wang,
Xiao Bi, Xiaodong Liu, Xiaohan Wang, Xiaojin Shen,
Xiaokang Chen, Xiaokang Zhang, Xiaosha Chen,
Xiaotao Nie, Xiaowen Sun, Xiaoxiang Wang, Xin
Cheng, Xin Liu, Xin Xie, Xingchao Liu, Xingkai Yu,
Xinnan Song, Xinxia Shan, Xinyi Zhou, Xinyu Yang,
Xinyuan Li, Xuecheng Su, Xuheng Lin, Y . K. Li,
Y . Q. Wang, Y . X. Wei, Y . X. Zhu, Yang Zhang, Yan-
hong Xu, Yanhong Xu, Yanping Huang, Yao Li, Yao
Zhao, Yaofeng Sun, Yaohui Li, Yaohui Wang, Yi Yu,
Yi Zheng, Yichao Zhang, Yifan Shi, Yiliang Xiong,
Ying He, Ying Tang, Yishi Piao, Yisong Wang, Yix-
uan Tan, Yiyang Ma, Yiyuan Liu, Yongqiang Guo,
Yu Wu, Yuan Ou, Yuchen Zhu, Yuduan Wang, Yue
Gong, Yuheng Zou, Yujia He, Yukun Zha, Yunfan
Xiong, Yunxian Ma, Yuting Yan, Yuxiang Luo, Yuxi-
ang You, Yuxuan Liu, Yuyang Zhou, Z. F. Wu, Z. Z.
Ren, Zehui Ren, Zhangli Sha, Zhe Fu, Zhean Xu,
Zhen Huang, Zhen Zhang, Zhenda Xie, Zhengyan
Zhang, Zhewen Hao, Zhibin Gou, Zhicheng Ma, Zhi-
gang Yan, Zhihong Shao, Zhipeng Xu, Zhiyu Wu,
Zhongyu Zhang, Zhuoshu Li, Zihui Gu, Zijia Zhu,
Zijun Liu, Zilin Li, Ziwei Xie, Ziyang Song, Ziyi
Gao, and Zizheng Pan. 2025. DeepSeek-V3 Techni-
cal Report. arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2412.19437.
Sebastian Farquhar, Jannik Kossen, Lorenz Kuhn, and
Yarin Gal. 2024. Detecting hallucinations in large
language models using semantic entropy. Nature ,
630(8017):625–630.
Luyu Gao, Zhuyun Dai, and Jamie Callan. 2021. Re-
think Training of BERT Rerankers in Multi-stage Re-
trieval Pipeline. In Djoerd Hiemstra, Marie-Francine
Moens, Josiane Mothe, Raffaele Perego, Martin Pot-
thast, and Fabrizio Sebastiani, editors, Advances in
Information Retrieval , volume 12657, pages 280–286.
Springer International Publishing, Cham.
Anisha Gunjal and Greg Durrett. 2024. Molecular Facts:
Desiderata for Decontextualization in LLM Fact Ver-
ification. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2024 , pages 3751–3768,
Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Pengcheng He, Jianfeng Gao, and Weizhu Chen. 2021.
Debertav3: Improving deberta using electra-style pre-
training with gradient-disentangled embedding shar-
ing. Preprint , arXiv:2111.09543.
Qisheng Hu, Quanyu Long, and Wenya Wang. 2024.
Decomposition Dilemmas: Does Claim Decomposi-
tion Boost or Burden Fact-Checking Performance?
arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2411.02400 [cs].
Hasan Iqbal, Yuxia Wang, Minghan Wang,
Georgi Nenkov Georgiev, Jiahui Geng, Iryna
Gurevych, and Preslav Nakov. 2024. Open-
FactCheck: A Unified Framework for Factuality
Evaluation of LLMs. In Proceedings of the 2024
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing: System Demonstrations ,
pages 219–229, Miami, Florida, USA. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Albert Q. Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Antoine
Roux, Arthur Mensch, Blanche Savary, Chris
Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las
Casas, Emma Bou Hanna, Florian Bressand, Gi-
anna Lengyel, Guillaume Bour, Guillaume Lam-
ple, Lélio Renard Lavaud, Lucile Saulnier, Marie-
Anne Lachaux, Pierre Stock, Sandeep Subramanian,
Sophia Yang, Szymon Antoniak, Teven Le Scao,
Théophile Gervet, Thibaut Lavril, Thomas Wang,
Timothée Lacroix, and William El Sayed. 2024. Mix-
tral of Experts. arXiv preprint .
Ryo Kamoi, Tanya Goyal, Juan Rodriguez, and Greg
Durrett. 2023. WiCE: Real-World Entailment for
Claims in Wikipedia. In Proceedings of the 2023
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing , pages 7561–7583, Singapore. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.
Philippe Laban, Tobias Schnabel, Paul N. Bennett, and
Marti A. Hearst. 2022. SummaC: Re-Visiting NLI-
based Models for Inconsistency Detection in Summa-
rization. Transactions of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics , 10:163–177.
Mike Lewis, Yinhan Liu, Naman Goyal, Marjan
Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
2020. BART: Denoising Sequence-to-Sequence Pre-
training for Natural Language Generation, Transla-
tion, and Comprehension. In Proceedings of the 58th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics , pages 7871–7880, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Haonan Li, Xudong Han, Hao Wang, Yuxia Wang,
Minghan Wang, Rui Xing, Yilin Geng, Zenan Zhai,
Preslav Nakov, and Timothy Baldwin. 2024. Loki:
An Open-Source Tool for Fact Verification. arXiv
preprint . ArXiv:2410.01794 [cs].
Alisa Liu, Swabha Swayamdipta, Noah A. Smith, and
Yejin Choi. 2022. WANLI: Worker and AI Collabo-
ration for Natural Language Inference Dataset Cre-
ation. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: EMNLP 2022 , pages 6826–6847,Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Sewon Min, Kalpesh Krishna, Xinxi Lyu, Mike Lewis,
Wen-tau Yih, Pang Koh, Mohit Iyyer, Luke Zettle-
moyer, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2023. FActScore:
Fine-grained Atomic Evaluation of Factual Precision
in Long Form Text Generation. In Proceedings of the
2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing , pages 12076–12100, Singa-
pore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Yixin Nie, Adina Williams, Emily Dinan, Mohit Bansal,
Jason Weston, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Adversar-
ial NLI: A New Benchmark for Natural Language
Understanding. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics , pages 4885–4901, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal,
Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Ale-
man, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Alt-
man, Shyamal Anadkat, Red Avila, Igor Babuschkin,
Suchir Balaji, Valerie Balcom, Paul Baltescu, Haim-
ing Bao, Mohammad Bavarian, Jeff Belgum, Ir-
wan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-Shapiro,
Christopher Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko,
Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brock-
man, Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button,
Trevor Cai, Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann, Brittany
Carey, Chelsea Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke
Chan, Che Chang, Fotis Chantzis, Derek Chen, Sully
Chen, Ruby Chen, Jason Chen, Mark Chen, Ben
Chess, Chester Cho, Casey Chu, Hyung Won Chung,
Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Currier, Yunxing Dai,
Cory Decareaux, Thomas Degry, Noah Deutsch,
Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve
Dowling, Sheila Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti,
Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix,
Simón Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Ful-
ford, Leo Gao, Elie Georges, Christian Gibson, Vik
Goel, Tarun Gogineni, Gabriel Goh, Rapha Gontijo-
Lopes, Jonathan Gordon, Morgan Grafstein, Scott
Gray, Ryan Greene, Joshua Gross, Shixiang Shane
Gu, Yufei Guo, Chris Hallacy, Jesse Han, Jeff Harris,
Yuchen He, Mike Heaton, Johannes Heidecke, Chris
Hesse, Alan Hickey, Wade Hickey, Peter Hoeschele,
Brandon Houghton, Kenny Hsu, Shengli Hu, Xin
Hu, Joost Huizinga, Shantanu Jain, Shawn Jain,
Joanne Jang, Angela Jiang, Roger Jiang, Haozhun
Jin, Denny Jin, Shino Jomoto, Billie Jonn, Hee-
woo Jun, Tomer Kaftan, Łukasz Kaiser, Ali Ka-
mali, Ingmar Kanitscheider, Nitish Shirish Keskar,
Tabarak Khan, Logan Kilpatrick, Jong Wook Kim,
Christina Kim, Yongjik Kim, Jan Hendrik Kirch-
ner, Jamie Kiros, Matt Knight, Daniel Kokotajlo,
Łukasz Kondraciuk, Andrew Kondrich, Aris Kon-
stantinidis, Kyle Kosic, Gretchen Krueger, Vishal
Kuo, Michael Lampe, Ikai Lan, Teddy Lee, Jan
Leike, Jade Leung, Daniel Levy, Chak Ming Li,
Rachel Lim, Molly Lin, Stephanie Lin, Mateusz
Litwin, Theresa Lopez, Ryan Lowe, Patricia Lue,
Anna Makanju, Kim Malfacini, Sam Manning, Todor

--- PAGE 11 ---
Markov, Yaniv Markovski, Bianca Martin, Katie
Mayer, Andrew Mayne, Bob McGrew, Scott Mayer
McKinney, Christine McLeavey, Paul McMillan,
Jake McNeil, David Medina, Aalok Mehta, Jacob
Menick, Luke Metz, Andrey Mishchenko, Pamela
Mishkin, Vinnie Monaco, Evan Morikawa, Daniel
Mossing, Tong Mu, Mira Murati, Oleg Murk, David
Mély, Ashvin Nair, Reiichiro Nakano, Rajeev Nayak,
Arvind Neelakantan, Richard Ngo, Hyeonwoo Noh,
Long Ouyang, Cullen O’Keefe, Jakub Pachocki, Alex
Paino, Joe Palermo, Ashley Pantuliano, Giambat-
tista Parascandolo, Joel Parish, Emy Parparita, Alex
Passos, Mikhail Pavlov, Andrew Peng, Adam Perel-
man, Filipe de Avila Belbute Peres, Michael Petrov,
Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Michael, Poko-
rny, Michelle Pokrass, Vitchyr H. Pong, Tolly Pow-
ell, Alethea Power, Boris Power, Elizabeth Proehl,
Raul Puri, Alec Radford, Jack Rae, Aditya Ramesh,
Cameron Raymond, Francis Real, Kendra Rimbach,
Carl Ross, Bob Rotsted, Henri Roussez, Nick Ry-
der, Mario Saltarelli, Ted Sanders, Shibani Santurkar,
Girish Sastry, Heather Schmidt, David Schnurr, John
Schulman, Daniel Selsam, Kyla Sheppard, Toki
Sherbakov, Jessica Shieh, Sarah Shoker, Pranav
Shyam, Szymon Sidor, Eric Sigler, Maddie Simens,
Jordan Sitkin, Katarina Slama, Ian Sohl, Benjamin
Sokolowsky, Yang Song, Natalie Staudacher, Fe-
lipe Petroski Such, Natalie Summers, Ilya Sutskever,
Jie Tang, Nikolas Tezak, Madeleine B. Thompson,
Phil Tillet, Amin Tootoonchian, Elizabeth Tseng,
Preston Tuggle, Nick Turley, Jerry Tworek, Juan Fe-
lipe Cerón Uribe, Andrea Vallone, Arun Vijayvergiya,
Chelsea V oss, Carroll Wainwright, Justin Jay Wang,
Alvin Wang, Ben Wang, Jonathan Ward, Jason Wei,
C. J. Weinmann, Akila Welihinda, Peter Welin-
der, Jiayi Weng, Lilian Weng, Matt Wiethoff, Dave
Willner, Clemens Winter, Samuel Wolrich, Hannah
Wong, Lauren Workman, Sherwin Wu, Jeff Wu,
Michael Wu, Kai Xiao, Tao Xu, Sarah Yoo, Kevin
Yu, Qiming Yuan, Wojciech Zaremba, Rowan Zellers,
Chong Zhang, Marvin Zhang, Shengjia Zhao, Tian-
hao Zheng, Juntang Zhuang, William Zhuk, and Bar-
ret Zoph. 2024. GPT-4 Technical Report. arXiv
preprint . ArXiv:2303.08774.
Shon Otmazgin, Arie Cattan, and Yoav Goldberg. 2022.
F-coref: Fast, Accurate and Easy to Use Coreference
Resolution. In Proceedings of the 2nd Conference
of the Asia-Pacific Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics and the 12th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing:
System Demonstrations , pages 48–56, Taipei, Taiwan.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano
Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea Finn.
2024. Direct preference optimization: your language
model is secretly a reward model. In Proceedings of
the 37th International Conference on Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems , NIPS ’23, pages 53728–
53741, Red Hook, NY , USA. Curran Associates Inc.
Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine
Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena, Yanqi Zhou,Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. 2020. Exploring the Lim-
its of Transfer Learning with a Unified Text-to-Text
Transformer. Journal of Machine Learning Research ,
21(140):1–67.
Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-
BERT: Sentence Embeddings using Siamese BERT-
Networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-
ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages
3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. 2017. Proximal
Policy Optimization Algorithms. arXiv preprint .
ArXiv:1707.06347 [cs].
Yixiao Song, Yekyung Kim, and Mohit Iyyer. 2024.
VeriScore: Evaluating the factuality of verifiable
claims in long-form text generation. In Findings
of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
EMNLP 2024 , pages 9447–9474, Miami, Florida,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Liyan Tang, Philippe Laban, and Greg Durrett. 2024.
MiniCheck: Efficient Fact-Checking of LLMs on
Grounding Documents. In Proceedings of the 2024
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing , pages 8818–8847, Miami, Florida,
USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Miriam Wanner, Seth Ebner, Zhengping Jiang, Mark
Dredze, and Benjamin Van Durme. 2024. A Closer
Look at Claim Decomposition. In Proceedings of
the 13th Joint Conference on Lexical and Compu-
tational Semantics (*SEM 2024) , pages 153–175,
Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Jerry Wei, Chengrun Yang, Xinying Song, Yifeng Lu,
Nathan Hu, Jie Huang, Dustin Tran, Daiyi Peng,
Ruibo Liu, Da Huang, Cosmo Du, and Quoc V . Le.
2024. Long-form factuality in large language models.
arXiv preprint . ArXiv:2403.18802 [cs].
Adina Williams, Nikita Nangia, and Samuel Bowman.
2018. A Broad-Coverage Challenge Corpus for Sen-
tence Understanding through Inference. In Proceed-
ings of the 2018 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume
1 (Long Papers) , pages 1112–1122, New Orleans,
Louisiana. Association for Computational Linguis-
tics.
An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang,
Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao,
Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayi-
heng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge,
Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jian Yang,
Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi
Yang, Jing Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai
Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Lianghao

--- PAGE 12 ---
Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze Li, Pei Zhang,
Peng Wang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Shixuan
Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Wenbiao
Yin, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Xu-
ancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang,
Yinger Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun Wang,
Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng Zhou, and Zihan
Qiu. 2025. Qwen3 Technical Report. arXiv preprint .
ArXiv:2505.09388.
A Claim Decomposition Algorithm
The algorithm to decompose claims into atomic
claims is shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Claim Decomposition Algorithm
Require: claim : A claim to be decomposed
Ensure: atomic _claims : A list of atomic claims
1:atomic _claims ←empty list
2:function DecomposeRecursively( claim ,
result )
3:sub_claims ←decompose _model (claim )
{Decompose the claim into sub-claims}
4:iflength (sub_claims ) = 1 then
5: append claim toresult {If the claim is
atomic, add it to the result}
6: return
7:end if
8:forsub_claim insub_claims do
9:sub_result ←empty list
10: DecomposeRecursively( sub_claim ,
sub_result )
11: append {sub_claim :sub_result}to
result
12:end for
13:end function
14:DecomposeRecursively( claim ,
atomic _claims )
B Data of Reverse Checking Process
In this section, we present the detailed data in-
volved in the reverse checking process, catego-
rized into supported andunsupported labels. Ta-
ble 6 categorizes the metrics used for analysis
along with the corresponding data statistics, such
as the total number of claims and the average count
of atomic claims. Our observations reveal that
claims comprising a higher number of atomic state-
ments tend to exhibit higher failure rates concern-
ingCOMPLETENESS ,CORRECTNESS , and SEMANTIC
ENTROPY .Label Metric Number of Claims Avg of Atomic Claims
supportedCOMPLETENESS 1235 6.06
CORRECTNESS 1273 5.84
SEMANTIC ENTROPY 805 3.3
unsupportedCOMPLETENESS 197 10.09
CORRECTNESS 159 12.79
SEMANTIC ENTROPY 627 10.86
Table 6: Detailed Data of Reverse Checking Process.
In Figure 5, we provide samples of the claims
and the corresponding atomic claims identified as
unsupported during the reverse checking process.
These samples highlight the typical issues encoun-
tered with unsupported data and offer insights into
the complexity of atomic claims.
C Post-Processing Strategies
We explore two such approaches: claim decontex-
tualization and verifiability.
C.1 Decontextualization
Decontextualization refines atomic claims by clari-
fying or modifying context that may obscure their
true meaning. Techniques such as coreference res-
olution, exemplified by FactCoef(Otmazgin et al.,
2022), process pairs of (c, ac i)to support de-
contextualization. Alternatively, large language
model (LLM) approaches, like MOLECULAR-
DECONTEXT(Gunjal and Durrett, 2024), en-
hance aciwith additional context for clarity and
precision. In this study, we employ SIMPLE-
DECONTEXT (Gunjal and Durrett, 2024) to de-
contextualize decomposed atomic claims.
C.2 Verifiability
Verifiability involves distinguishing between con-
tent that can be substantiated and that which cannot,
particularly in long-form generation tasks. Assum-
ing all claims are verifiable may lead to extract-
ing entire texts, including unverifiable components
such as examples or hypotheticals, potentially un-
fairly penalizing models during evaluation. In this
study, we use VERISCORE (Song et al., 2024)
to evaluate the verifiability of each decomposed
atomic claim.
C.3 Results
Table 7 presents the number of atomic claims edited
through decontextualization and removed due to
verifiability concerns. Our dataset, derived from
Wikipedia entities, frequently includes incomplete
names or pronouns, necessitating decontextualiza-
tion for standalone clarity. However, decontextual-
ization may not significantly enhance fact-checking

--- PAGE 13 ---
Type : not complete
Claim : Sweden is increasingly looking at waste-to-energy generation as an energy diversifi-
cation strategy.
Atomic Claims : [’Sweden is looking at waste-to-energy generation.’, ’Waste-to-energy genera-
tion is considered as an energy diversification strategy.’]
Type : not correct
Claim : She held a role under John Major.
Atomic Claims : [’She held a role in government.’, ’The role was under John Major.’]
Type : not independent
Claim : Àlex Corretja was the defending champion, but did not participate. Nicolás Lapentti
won the title, defeating Vince Spadea in the final 4–6, 6–4, 6–4.
Atomic Claims : [’Àlex Corretja was the defending champion.’, ’Àlex Corretja did not
participate.’, ’Nicolás Lapentti won the title.’, ’Vince Spadea was in the final match.’,
’Nicolás Lapentti defeated Vince Spadea in the final.’, ’The final score was 4–6, 6–4, 6–4.’]
Figure 5: Samples for unsupported data in reverse checking process: claim and atomic claims.
systems as these models inherently infer context-
dependent information, particularly when retrieval
stages provide context alignment. While decontex-
tualization can improve readability by eliminating
context dependence, merely replacing “he” with
“Lanny Flaherty” may not enhance fact-checking
performance. Additionally, errors introduced dur-
ing decontextualization could actually reduce fact-
checking effectiveness, as demonstrated in (Tang
et al., 2024).
Furthermore, some decomposed atomic claims
are unverifiable, as they cannot be definitively
proven true or false, such as “Betacyanin is like
a superhero cape”. Despite their correctness and
relevance to the original text, these atomic claims
must be generated when decomposing a claim but
can be disregarded or labeled as unverifiable dur-
ing verification. These results indicate a significant
potential for quality improvement through these
post-processing strategies.
Strategy Filter Num of Atomic Claims
Decontextualization 14515
Verifiability 5566
Table 7: Statistics of the post-processing strategies.
D Prompt for Claim Decomposition and
Reverse Checking
The prompt for claim decomposition is shown in
Figure 6, and the prompt for for reverse checking
is shown in Figure 7.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Claim Decomposition Prompt
Break down the Claim into simple Atomic Claims.
Steps:
1. Check if the Claim is simple. If yes, return it as is.
2. If complex, identify key components and break into distinct Atomic Claims.
3. Ensure Atomic Claims cover the full meaning without redundancy.
4. Preserve Named Entities and replace pronouns with full names.
5. Verify each fact is clear, distinct, and self-contained.
Example Walkthrough:
Claim: Ash is known for her comedic timing and her ability to play a wide range of characters,
from quirky and offbeat to more serious and dramatic roles.
Steps:
1. Claim is complex.
2. Break into:
• Ash is known for her comedic timing.
• Ash is known for her ability to play a wide range of characters.
• The range includes quirky and offbeat roles.
• The range includes more serious and dramatic roles.
3. Atomic Claims cover all aspects.
4. Named Entities (Ash) preserved.
5. Atomic Claims are clear and distinct.
Atomic Claims:
<answer>
- Ash is known for her comedic timing.
- Ash is known for her ability to play a wide range of characters.
- The range includes quirky and offbeat roles.
- The range includes more serious and dramatic roles.
</answer>
Figure 6: Claim Decomposition Prompt with Chain of Thought

--- PAGE 15 ---
Claim Decomposition Prompt (Continued)
Claim: 38 artistic roller skating competitors, from 11 nations, participated in the tournament.
Steps:
1. Claim is complex.
2. Break into:
• 38 artistic roller skating competitors participated.
• Competitors came from 11 nations.
3. Atomic Claims cover all aspects.
4. Named Entities preserved.
5. Atomic Claims are clear and distinct.
Atomic Claims:
<answer>
- 38 artistic roller skating competitors participated.
- Competitors came from 11 nations.
</answer>
Claim: The artistic roller skating tournaments took place between 22 and 23 July.
Steps:
1. Claim is simple.
2. Return as is.
Atomic Claims:
<answer>
- The artistic roller skating tournaments took place between 22 and 23 July.
</answer>
Claim: [Claim]

--- PAGE 16 ---
Atomic Claims Verifying Prompt
Verify the Atomic Claims against the Original Claim for completeness, correctness, and inde-
pendence.
Steps:
1. Aggregate the Atomic Claims to ensure they fully represent the meaning of the Original Claim.
2. Check that each Atomic Claim is factually correct and contains no information absent from the
Original Claim.
3. Identify any semantic overlap between Atomic Claims, ensuring each is distinct and
independent.
Example Walkthrough:
Original Claim: Ash is known for her comedic timing and her ability to play a wide range of
characters, from quirky and offbeat to more serious and dramatic roles.
Atomic Claims:
• Ash is known for her comedic timing.
• Ash is known for her ability to play a wide range of characters.
• The range includes quirky and offbeat roles.
• The range includes more serious and dramatic roles.
Analysis:
1. The Atomic Claims collectively represent the complete Original Claim.
2. Each Atomic Claim is factually accurate and sourced directly from the Original Claim.
3. There is no semantic overlap; each Atomic Claim is distinct.
Conclusion:
<answer>
- complete
- correct
- independent
</answer>
Figure 7: Atomic Claims Verifying Prompt with Chain of Thought

--- PAGE 17 ---
Atomic Claims Verifying Prompt (Continued)
Original Claim: 38 artistic roller skating competitors, from 11 nations, participated in the tourna-
ment.
Atomic Claims:
• 36 artistic roller skating competitors participated.
Analysis:
1. The Atomic Claims do not fully represent the Original Claim.
2. An Atomic Claim is factually inaccurate, diverging from the Original Claim.
3. There is no semantic overlap; each Atomic Claim is distinct.
Conclusion:
<answer>
- not complete
- not correct
- independent
</answer>
Original Claim: The artistic roller skating tournaments took place between 22 and 23 July.
Atomic Claims:
• The artistic roller skating tournaments took place between 22 and 23 July.
• The artistic roller skating tournaments took place in July.
Analysis:
1. The Atomic Claims represent the complete Original Claim.
2. Each Atomic Claim is factually consistent with the Original Claim.
3. There is semantic overlap.
Conclusion:
<answer>
- complete
- correct
- not independent
</answer>
Original Claim: [Original Claim]
Atomic Claims: [Atomic Claims]
Analyze and conclude whether the Atomic Claims meet the criteria or require adjustments.
Figure 8: Atomic Claims Verifying Prompt with Chain of Thought (Continued)
